MOSCOW, February 15, 1890. I answer you, dear Alexey Nikolaevitch, at once on receiving your letter. It was your name-day, and I forgot it!! Forgive me, dear friend, and accept my belated congratulations. Did you really not like the ”Kreutzer Sonata”? I don’t say it is a work of genius for all time, of that I am no judge; but to my thinking, among the mass of all that is written now, here and abroad, one scarcely could ﬁnd anything else as powerful both in the gravity of its conception 277 and the beauty of its execution. To say nothing of its artistic merits, which in places are strik ing, one must be grateful to the novel, if only because it is keenly stimulating to thought. As one reads it, one can scarcely refrain from cry ing out: ”That’s true,” or ”That’s absurd.” It is true it has some very annoying defects. Apart from all those you enumerate, it has one for which one cannot readily forgive the author– that is, the audacity with which Tolstoy holds forth about what he doesn’t know and is too ob stinate to care to understand. Thus his state ments about syphilis, foundling hospitals, the aversion of women for the sexual relation, and so on, are not merely open to dispute, but show him up as an ignoramus who has not, in the course of his long life, taken the trouble to read two or three books written by specialists. But yet these defects ﬂy away like feathers in the wind; one simply does not notice them in face of the real worth of the story, or, if one notices them, it is only with a little vexation that the story has not escaped the fate of all the works of man, all imperfect and never free from blem ish. My Petersburg friends and acquaintances are angry with me? What for? For my not having bored them enough with my presence, which has for so long been a bore to myself! Soothe their minds. Tell them that in Petersburg I ate a great many dinners and a great many sup pers, but did not fascinate one lady; that every day I was conﬁdent of leaving by the evening train, that I was detained by my friends and by -The Marine Almanack-, the whole of which I had to look through from the year 1852. While I was in Petersburg, I got through in one month more than my young friends would in a year. Let them be angry, though! * * * * * I sit all day long reading and making ex tracts. I have nothing in my head or on pa per except Sahalin. Mental obsession. Mania Sachalinosa. Not long ago I dined with Madame Yermolov. [Translator’s Note: The celebrated actress.] A wild-ﬂower thrust into the same nosegay with the carnation was the more fragrant for the good company it had kept. So I, after dining with the star, was aware of a halo round my head for two days afterwards ... Good-bye, my dear friend; come and see us.... TO A. S. SUVORIN. MOSCOW, February 23, 1890. ... My brother Alexandr is a slow-witted crea ture; he is enthusiastic over Ornatsky’s mis sionary speech, in which he says that the na tives do not become Christians because they are waiting for a special ukaz (that is, com mand) from the Tsar on the subject and are waiting for their chiefs to be baptized ... (by force–be it understood). This eloquent pontifex 281 says, too, that the native priests ought, in view of their ascetic manner of life, to be removed from the natives and put into special institu tions somewhat after the fashion of monaster ies. A nice set of people and no mistake! They have wasted two million roubles, they send out every year from the academy dozens of mission aries who cost the treasury and the people large sums, yet they cannot convert the natives, and what is more, want the police and the military to help them with ﬁre and sword.... If you have Madame Tsebrikov’s article, do not trouble to send it. Such articles give no information and only waste time; I want facts. Indeed, in Russia there is a terrible poverty of facts, and a terrible abundance of reﬂections of all sorts. February 28. ... To-morrow is spring, and within ten to ﬁfteen days the larks will come back. But alas!– the coming spring seems strange to me, for I am going away from it. In Sahalin there is very good ﬁsh, but there are no hot drinks.... Our geologists, ichthyologists, zoologists and so on, are fearfully uneducated people. They write such a vile jargon that it not only bores one to read it, but one actually has at times to remodel the sentences before one can un derstand them; on the other hand, they have solemnity and earnestness enough and to spare. It’s really beastly.... March 4. I have sent you to-day two stories: Filippov’s (he was here yesterday) and Yezhov’s. I have not had time to read the latter, and I think it is as well to say, once for all, that I am not re sponsible for what I send you. My handwriting on the address does not mean that I like the story. Poor Yezhov has been to see me; he sat near the table crying: his young wife is in consump tion. He must take her at once to the south. To my question whether he had money he an swered that he had.... It’s vile catch-cold weather; the sky itself is sneezing. I can’t bear to look at it.... I have already begun writing of Sahalin. I have written ﬁve pages. It reads all right, as though written with intelligence and authority ... I quote foreign authors second-hand, but minutely and in a tone as though I could speak every foreign language perfectly. It’s regular swindling. Yezhov has upset me with his tears. He re minded me of something, and I was sorry for him too. Don’t forget us sinners. TO N. M. LINTVARYOV. MOSCOW, March 5, 1890. ... As for me, I have a cough too, but I am alive and I believe I’m well. I shan’t be with you this summer, as I am going in April, on affairs of my own, to the island of Sahalin, and shall not be back till December. I am going across Siberia (eleven thousand versts) and shall come 285 back by sea. I believe Misha wrote to you as though someone were commissioning me to go, but that’s nonsense. I am commissioning my self to go, on my own account. There are lots of bears and escaped convicts in Sahalin, so that in case -messieurs- the wild beasts dine off me or some tramp cuts my throat, I beg you not to remember evil against me. Of course if I have the time and the skill to write what I want to about Sahalin, I shall send you the book immediately that it comes into the world; it will be dull, a specialist’s book con sisting of nothing but ﬁgures, but let me count upon your indulgence: you will suppress your yawns as you read it.... TO A. S. SUVORIN. MOSCOW, March 9. About Sahalin we are both mistaken, but you probably more than I. I am going in the full conviction that my visit will furnish no contri bution of value either to literature or science: I have neither the knowledge, nor the time, nor the ambition for that. I have neither the plans of a Humboldt nor of a Kennan. I want to write some 100 to 200 pages, and so do something, however little, for medical science, which, as you are aware, I have neglected shockingly. Pos 287 sibly I shall not succeed in writing anything, but still the expedition does not lose its charm for me: reading, looking about me, and listen ing, I shall learn a great deal and gain experi ence. I have not yet travelled, but thanks to the books which I have been compelled to read, I have learned a great deal which anyone ought to be ﬂogged for not knowing, and which I was so ignorant as not to have known before. More over, I imagine the journey will be six months of incessant hard work, physical and mental, and that is essential for me, for I am a Little Russian and have already begun to be lazy. I must take myself in hand. My expedition may be nonsense, obstinacy, a craze, but think a moment and tell me what I am losing if I go. Time? Money? Shall I suffer hardships? My time is worth nothing; money I never have any way; as for hardships, I shall travel with horses, twenty-ﬁve to thirty days, not more, all the rest of the time I shall be sitting on the deck of a steamer or in a room, and shall be continually bombarding you with letters. Suppose the expedition gives me nothing, yet surely there will be 2 or 3 days out of the whole journey which I shall remember all my life with ecstasy or bitterness, etc., etc.... So that’s how it is, sir. All that is unconvincing, but you know you write just as unconvincingly. For instance, you say that Sahalin is of no use and no interest to anyone. Can that be true? Sahalin can be useless and uninteresting only to a society which does not exile thousands of people to it and does not spend millions of rou bles on it. Except Australia in the past and Cayenne, Sahalin is the only place where one can study colonization by convicts; all Europe is interested in it, and is it no use to us? Not more than 25 to 30 years ago our Russians ex ploring Sahalin performed amazing feats which exalt them above humanity, and that’s no use to us: we don’t know what those men were, and simply sit within four walls and complain that God has made man amiss. Sahalin is a place of the most unbearable sufferings of which man, free and captive, is capable. Those who work near it and upon it have solved fearful, respon sible problems, and are still solving them. I am not sentimental, or I would say that we ought to go to places like Sahalin to worship as the Turks go to Mecca, and that sailors and gaolers ought to think of the prison in Sahalin as mil itary men think of Sevastopol. From the books I have read and am reading, it is evident that we have sent -millions- of men to rot in prison, have destroyed them–casually, without think ing, barbarously; we have driven men in fetters through the cold ten thousand versts, have in fected them with syphilis, have depraved them, have multiplied criminals, and the blame for all this we have thrown upon the gaolers and red nosed superintendents. Now all educated Eu rope knows that it is not the superintendents that are to blame, but all of us; yet that has nothing to do with us, it is not interesting. The vaunted sixties did -nothing- for the sick and for prisoners, so breaking the chief command ment of Christian civilization. In our day some thing is being done for the sick, nothing for prisoners; prison management is entirely with out interest for our jurists. No, I assure you that Sahalin is of use and of interest to us, and the only thing to regret is that I am going there, and not someone else who knows more about it and would be more able to rouse public inter est. Nothing much will come of my going there. * * * * * There have been disturbances among the stu dents on a grand scale here. It began with the Petrovsky Academy, where the authorities for bade the students to take young ladies to their rooms, suspecting the ladies of politics as well as of prostitution. From the Academy it spread to the University, where now the students, sur rounded by fully armed and mounted Hectors and Achilleses with lances, make the following demands: 1. Complete autonomy for the universities. 2. Complete freedom of teaching. 3. Free right of entrance to the university without distinction of religious denomination, nationality, sex, and social position. 4. Right of entrance to the university for the Jews without restriction, and equal rights for them with the other students. . Freedom of meeting and recognition of the students’ associations. 6. The establishment of a university and students’ tribunal. 7. The abolition of the police duties of the inspectors. 8. Lowering of the fees for instruction. This I copied from a manifesto, with some abbreviations. TO I. L. SHTCHEGLOV. MOSCOW, March 22, 1890. My greetings, dear Jean! Thanks for your long letter and for the good will of which it is full from beginning to end. I shall be delighted to read your military story. Will it come out in the Easter number? It is a long time since I read anything of yours or my own. You say that you 295 want to give me a harsh scolding ”especially on the score of morality and art,” you speak vaguely of my crimes as deserving friendly cen sure, and threaten me with ”an inﬂuential news paper criticism.” If you scratch out the word ”art,” the whole phrase in quotation marks be comes clearer, but gains a signiﬁcance which, to tell the truth, perplexes me not a little. Jean, what is it? How is one to understand it? Can I really be different in my ideas of morality from people like you, and so much so as to deserve censure and even an inﬂuential article? I can not take it that you mean some subtle higher morality, as there are no lower, higher, or medium moralities, but only one which Jesus Christ gave us, and which now prevents you and me and Barantsevitch from stealing, insulting, lying, and so on. If I can trust the ease of my conscience, I have never by word or deed, in thought, or in my stories, or in my farces, coveted my neigh bour’s wife, nor his man, nor his ox, nor any of his cattle, I have not stolen, nor been a hyp ocrite, I have not ﬂattered the great nor sought their favour, I have not blackmailed, nor lived at other people’s expense. It is true I have waxed wanton and slothful, have laughed heedlessly, have eaten too much and drunk too much and been proﬂigate. But all that is a personal mat ter, and all that does not deprive me of the right to think that, as far as morals are concerned, I am nothing out of the ordinary, one way or the other. Nothing heroic and nothing scoundrelly– I am just like everyone else; I have many sins, but I am quits with morality, as I pay for those sins with interest in the discomforts they bring with them. If you want to abuse me cruelly be cause I am not a hero, you’d better throw your cruelty out of the window, and instead of abuse, let me hear your charming tragic laugh–that’s better. But of the word ”art” I am terriﬁed, as mer chants’ wives are terriﬁed of ”brimstone.” When people talk to me of what is artistic and inartis tic, of what is dramatic and not dramatic, of tendency, realism, and so on, I am bewildered, hesitatingly assent, and answer with banal half truths not worth a brass farthing. I divide all works into two classes: those I like and those I don’t. I have no other criterion, and if you ask me why I like Shakespeare and don’t like Zlatovratsky, I don’t venture to answer. Per haps in time and as I grow wiser I may work out some criterion, but meanwhile all conver sations about what is ”artistic” only weary me, and seem to me like a continuation of the scholas tic disputations with which people wearied them selves in the middle ages. If criticism, on the authority of which you rely, knows what you and I don’t know, why has it up till now not spoken? why does it not reveal the truth and the immutable laws? If it knew, believe me, it would long ago have shown us the true path and we should have known what to do, and Fofanov would not have been in a madhouse, Garshin would have been alive to-day, Barantsevitch would not have been so depressed and we should not be so dull and ill at ease as we are, and you would not feel drawn to the theatre and I to Sahalin. But criticism maintains a digniﬁed silence or gets out of it with idle trashy babble. If it seems to you authoritative it is because it is stupid, con ceited, impudent, and clamorous; because it is an empty barrel one cannot help hearing. But let us have done with that and sing some thing out of a different opera. Please don’t build any literary hopes on my Sahalin trip. I am not going for the sake of impressions or observa tions, but simply for the sake of living for six months differently from how I have lived hith erto. Don’t rely on me, old man; if I am suc cessful and clever enough to do something, so much the better; if not, don’t blame me. I am going after Easter. I will send you in due time my Sahalin address and minute instructions.... TO A. S. SUVORIN. MOSCOW, March 22, 1890. ... Yesterday a young lady told me that Profes sor Storozhenko had related to her the follow ing anecdote. The Sovereign liked the -Kreutzer Sonata-. Pobyedonostsev, Lubimov, and the other cherubim and seraphim, hastened to jus tify their attitude to Tolstoy by showing his Majesty ”Nikolay Palkin.” After reading it, his Majesty was so furious that he ordered measures to be 301 taken. Prince Dolgorukov was informed. And so one ﬁne day an adjutant from Dolgorukov comes to Tolstoy and invites him to go at once to the prince. The latter replies: ”Tell the prince that I only visit the houses of my acquaintances.” The adjutant, overcome with confusion, rides away, and next day brings Tolstoy the ofﬁcial notice demanding from him an explanation in regard to his ”Nikolay Palkin.” Tolstoy reads the document and says: ”Tell his excellency that I have not for a long time past written anything for publication; I write only for my friends, and if my friends spread my writings abroad, they are responsible and not I. Tell him that!” ”But I can’t tell him that,” cried the adjutant in horror, ”the prince will not believe me!” ”The prince will not believe his subordinates? That’s bad.” Two days later the adjutant comes again with a fresh document, and learns that Tolstoy has gone away to Yasnaya Polyana. That is the end of the anecdote. Now about the new movements. They ﬂog in our police stations; a rate has been ﬁxed; from a peasant they take ten kopecks for a beat ing, from a workman twenty–that’s for the rods and the trouble. Peasant women are ﬂogged too. Not long ago, in their enthusiasm for beat ing in a police station, they thrashed a couple of budding lawyers, an incident upon which  Russkiya Vyedomosti- has a vague paragraph to-day; an investigation has begun. Another sign of the times: the cabmen ap prove of the students’ disturbances. ”They are making a riot for the poor to be taken in to study,” they explain, ”learning is not only for the rich.” It is said that when a crowd of students were being taken by night to the prison the populace fell upon the gendarmes to rescue the students from them. The populace is said to have shouted: ”You have set up ﬂogging for us, but they stand up for us.” March 29. ... Fatigue is a relative matter. You say you used to work twenty hours out of the twenty four and were not exhausted. But you know one may be exhausted lying all day long on the sofa. You used to write for twenty hours, but you know you were in perfect health all that time, you were stimulated by success, deﬁance, a sense of your talent; you liked your work, or you wouldn’t have written. Your heir-apparent sits up late, not because he has a talent for journalism or a love for his work, but simply because his father is an editor of a newspa per. The difference is vast. He ought to have been a doctor or a lawyer, to have had an in come of two thousand roubles a year, and pub lished his articles not in -Novoye Vremya- and not in the spirit of -Novoye Vremya-. Only those young people can be accepted as healthy who refuse to be reconciled with the old order and foolishly or wisely struggle against it–such is the will of nature and it is the foundation of progress, while your son began by absorbing the old order. In our most intimate talks he has never once abused Tatistchev or Burenin, and that’s a bad sign. You are a hundred times as liberal as he is, and it ought to be the other way. He utters a listless and indolent protest, he soon drops his voice and soon agrees, and altogether one has the impression that he has no interest whatever in the contest; that is, he looks on at the cock-ﬁght like a spectator and has no cock of his own. And one ought to have one’s own cock, else life is without interest. The unfortunate thing, too, is that he is intelligent, and great intelligence with little interest in life is like a great machine which produces nothing, yet requires a great deal of fuel and exhausts the owner.... April 1. You abuse me for objectivity, calling it in difference to good and evil, lack of ideals and ideas, and so on. You would have me, when I describe horse-stealers, say: ”Stealing horses is an evil.” But that has been known for ages without my saying so. Let the jury judge them, it’s my job simply to show what sort of people they are. I write: you are dealing with horse stealers, so let me tell you that they are not beg gars but well-fed people, that they are people of a special cult, and that horse-stealing is not simply theft but a passion. Of course it would be pleasant to combine art with a sermon, but for me personally it is extremely difﬁcult and almost impossible, owing to the conditions of technique. You see, to depict horse-stealers in seven hundred lines I must all the time speak and think in their tone and feel in their spirit, otherwise, if I introduce subjectivity, the im age becomes blurred and the story will not be as compact as all short stories ought to be. When I write I reckon entirely upon the reader to add for himself the subjective elements that are lacking in the story. April 11. Madame N. who used at one time to live in your family is here now. She married the artist N., a nice but tedious man who wants at all costs to travel with me to Sahalin to sketch. To refuse him my company I haven’t the courage, but to travel with him would be simple misery. He is going to Petersburg in a day or two to sell his pictures, and at his wife’s request will call on you to -ask your advice-. With a view to this his wife came to ask me for a letter of intro duction to you. Be my benefactor, tell N. that I am a drunkard, a swindler, a nihilist, a rowdy character, and that it is out of the question to travel with me, and that a journey in my com pany will do nothing but upset him. Tell him he will be wasting his time. Of course it would be very nice to have my book illustrated, but when I learned that N. was hoping to get not less than a thousand roubles for it, I lost all appetite for illustrations. My dear fellow, ad vise him against it!!! Why it is your advice he wants, the devil only knows. April 15. And so, my dear friend, I am setting off on Wednesday or Thursday at latest. Good-bye till December. Good luck in my absence. I received the money, thank you very much, though ﬁf teen hundred roubles is a great deal; I don’t know where to put it.... I feel as though I were preparing for the battleﬁeld, though I see no dangers before me but toothache, which I am sure to have on the journey. As I am provided with nothing in the way of papers but a pass port, I may have unpleasant encounters with the authorities, but that is a passing trouble. If they refuse to show me something, I shall sim ply write in my book that they wouldn’t show it me, and that’s all, and I won’t worry. In case I am drowned or anything of that sort, you might keep it in mind that all I have or may have in the future belongs to my sister; she will pay my debts. I am taking my mother with me and putting her down at the Troitsky Monastery; I am tak ing my sister too, and leaving her at Kostroma. I am telling them I shall be back in September. I shall go over the university in Tomsk. As the only faculty there is medicine I shall not show myself an ignoramus. I have bought myself a fur coat, an ofﬁcer’s waterproof leather coat, big boots, and a big knife for cutting sausage and hunting tigers. I am equipped from head to foot. TO HIS SISTER. STEAMER ”ALEXANDR NEVSKY 23,” April, 1890, early in the morning. My dear Tunguses! Did you have rain when Ivan was coming back from the monastery? In Yaroslavl there was such a downpour that I had to swathe my self in my leather chiton. My ﬁrst impression of the Volga was poisoned by the rain, by the tear-stained windows of the cabin, and the wet nose of G., who came to meet me at the sta tion. In the rain Yaroslavl looks like Zvenig orod, and its churches remind me of Perervin sky Monastery; there are lots of illiterate sign boards, it’s muddy, jackdaws with big heads strut about the pavement. In the steamer I made it my ﬁrst duty to in dulge my talent–that is, to sleep. When I woke I beheld the sun. The Volga is not bad; wa ter meadows, monasteries bathed in sunshine, white churches; the wide expanse is marvel lous, wherever one looks it would be a nice place to sit down and begin ﬁshing. Class ladies [Trans lator’s Note: I.e., School chaperons, whose duty it is to sit in the classroom while the girls are receiving instruction from a master.] wander about on the banks, nipping at the green grass. The shepherd’s horn can be heard now and then. White gulls, looking like the younger Drishka, hover over the water. The steamer is not up to much.... * * * * * Kundasova is travelling with me. Where she is going and with what object I don’t know. When I question her about it, she launches off into extremely misty allusions about someone who has appointed a tryst with her in a ravine near Kineshma, then goes off into a wild giggle and begins stamping her feet or prodding with her elbow whatever comes ﬁrst. We have passed both Kineshma and the ravine, but she still goes on in the steamer, at which of course I am very much pleased; by the way, yesterday for the ﬁrst time in my life I saw her eating. She eats no less than other people, but she eats me chanically, as though she were munching oats. Kostroma is a nice town. I saw the stretch of river on which the languid Levitan used to live. I saw Kineshma, where I walked along the boulevard and watched the local -beaus . Here I went into the chemist’s shop to buy some Bertholet salts for my tongue, which was like leather after the medicine I had taken. The chemist, on seeing Olga Petrovna, was over come with delight and confusion; she was the same. They were evidently old acquaintances, and judging from the conversation between them they had walked more than once about the ravines near Kineshma. ... It’s rather cold and rather dull, but inter esting on the whole. The steamer whistles every minute; its whistle is midway between the bray of an ass and an Aeolian harp. In ﬁve or six hours we shall be in Nizhni. The sun is ris ing. I slept last night artistically. My money is safe; that is because I am constantly pressing my hands on my stomach. Very beautiful are the steam-tugs, dragging after them four or ﬁve barges each; they look like some ﬁne young intellectual trying to run away while a plebeian wife, mother-in-law, sister in-law, and wife’s grandmother hold on to his coat-tails. * * * * * The sun is hiding behind the clouds, the sky is overcast, and the broad Volga looks gloomy. Levitan ought not to live on the Volga. It lays a weight of gloom on the soul. Though it would not be bad to have an estate on its banks. * * * * * If the waiter would wake I should ask him for some coffee; as it is, I have to drink water with out any relish for it. My greetings to Maryushka and Olga. [Footnote: The Chekhovs’ servants.] Well, keep well and take care of yourselves. I will write regularly. Your bored Volga-travelling Homo Sachalien sis, A. CHEKHOV. FROM THE STEAMER, Evening, April 24, 1890. MY DEAR TUNGUSES! I am ﬂoating on the Kama, but I can’t ﬁx the exact locality; I believe we are near Tchistopol. I cannot extol the beauties of the scenery ei ther, as it is hellishly cold; the birches are not yet out, there are still patches of snow here and there, bits of ice ﬂoat by–in short, the pic turesque has gone to the dogs. I sit in the 317 cabin, where people of all sorts and conditions sit at the table, and listen to the conversation, wondering whether it is not time for me to have tea. If I had my way I should do nothing all day but eat; as I haven’t the money to be eat ing all day long I sleep and sleep. I don’t go up on deck, it’s cold. By night it rains and by day there is an unpleasant wind. Oh, the caviare! I eat it and eat and never have enough. ... It is a pity I did not think to get myself a little bag for tea and sugar. I have to order it a glass at a time, which is tiresome and expen sive. I meant to buy some tea and sugar to-day at Kazan, but I over-slept myself. Rejoice, O mother! I believe I stop twenty four hours at Ekaterinburg, and shall see the relations. Perhaps their hearts may be soft ened and they will give me three roubles and an ounce of tea. From the conversation I am listening to at this moment, I gather that the members of a ju dicial tribunal are travelling with me. They are not gifted persons. The merchants, who put in their word from time to time seem, however, in telligent. One comes across fearfully rich peo ple. Sterlets are cheaper than mushrooms; you soon get sick of them. What more is there for me to write about? There is nothing.... There is a General, though, and a lean fair man. The former keeps dashing from his cabin to the deck and back again, and sending his photograph off somewhere; the latter is got up to look like Nadson, and tries thereby to give one to know that he is a writer. Today he was mendaciously telling a lady that he had a book published by Suvorin; I, of course, put on an expression of awe. My money is all safe, except what I have eaten. They won’t feed me for nothing, the scoundrels. I am neither gay nor bored, but there is a sort of numbness in my soul. I like to sit with out moving or speaking. To-day, for instance, I have scarcely uttered ﬁve words. That’s not true, though: I talked to a priest on deck. We begin to come across natives; there are lots of Tatars: they are a respectable and well behaved people. I beg Father and Mother not to worry, and not to imagine dangers which do not exist. * * * * * Excuse me for writing about nothing but food. If I did not write about food I should have to write about cold, for I have no other subjects. * * * * * April 29, 1890. MY DEAR TUNGUSES! The Kama is a very dull river. To realise its beauties one would have to be a native sitting motionless on a barge beside a barrel of naph tha, or a sack of dried ﬁsh, continually taking a pull at the bottle. The river banks are bare, the trees are bare, the earth is a dull brown, there are patches of snow, and there is such a wind that the devil himself could not blow as keenly and hatefully. When a cold wind blows and rufﬂes up the water, which now after the ﬂoods is the colour of coffee slops, one feels cold and bored and miserable; the strains of a con certina on the bank sound dejected, ﬁgures in tattered sheepskins standing motionless on the barges that meet us look as though they were petriﬁed by some unending grief. The towns on the Kama are grey; one would think the in habitants were employed in the manufacture of clouds, boredom, soaking fences and mud in the streets, as their sole occupation. The stopping-places are thronged with inhabitants of the educated class, for whom the arrival of a steamer is an event.... ... To judge from appearances not one of them earns more than thirty-ﬁve roubles, and all of them are ailing in some way. I have told you already there are some legal gentlemen in the steamer: the president of the court, one of the judges, and the prosecutor. The president is a hale and hearty old German who has embraced Orthodoxy, is pious, a ho moeopath, and evidently a devotee of the sex. The judge is an old man such as dear Nikolay used to draw; he walks bent double, coughs, and is fond of facetious subjects. The prosecu tor is a man of forty-three, dissatisﬁed with life, a liberal, a sceptic, and a very good-natured fel low. All the journey these gentlemen have been occupied in eating, settling mighty questions and eating, reading and eating. There is a li brary on the steamer, and I saw the prosecutor reading my ”In the Twilight.” They began talk ing about me. Mamin-Sibiryak, who has de scribed the Urals, is the author most liked in these parts. He is more talked of than Tolstoy. I have been two and a half years sailing to Perm, so it seems to me. We reached there at two o’clock in the night. The train went at six o’clock in the evening. I had to wait. It rained. Rain, cold, mud ... brrr! The Uralsky line is a good one.... That is due to the abundance of business-like people here, factories, mines, and so on, for whom time is precious. Waking yesterday morning and looking out of the carriage window I felt an aversion for na ture: the earth was white, trees covered with hoar-frost, and a regular blizzard pursuing the train. Now isn’t it revolting? Isn’t it disgust ing? ... I have no goloshes, I pulled on my big boots, and on my way to the refreshment-room for coffee I made the whole Ural region smell of tar. And when we got to Ekaterinburg there was rain, snow, and hail. I put on my leather coat. The cabs are something inconceivable, wretched, dirty, drenched, without springs, the horse’s four legs straddling, huge hoofs, gaunt spines ... the droshkies here are a clumsy par ody of our britchkas. A tattered top is put on to a britchka, that is all. And the more exactly I describe the cabman here and his vehicle, the more it will seem like a caricature. They drive not on the middle of the road where it is jolting, but near the gutter where it is muddy and soft. All the cabmen are like Dobrolyubov. In Russia all the towns are alike. Ekater inburg is exactly the same as Perm or Tula. The note of the bells is magniﬁcent, velvety. I stopped at the American Hotel (not at all bad), and at once sent word of my arrival to A. M. S., telling him I meant to stay in my hotel room for two days. The people here inspire the newcomer with a feeling akin to horror. They are big-browed, big-jawed, broad-shouldered fellows with huge ﬁsts and tiny eyes. They are born in the local iron foundries, and at their birth a mechanic of ﬁciates instead of an accoucheur. A specimen comes into your room with a samovar or a bot tle of water, and you expect him every minute to murder you. I stand aside. This morning just such a one came in, big-browed, big-jawed, huge, towering up to the ceiling, seven feet across the shoulders and wearing a fur coat too. Well, I thought, this one will certainly mur der me. It appeared that this was our relation A. M. S. We began to talk. He is a member of the local Zemstvo and manager of his cousin’s mill, which is lighted by electric light; he is editor of the -Ekaterinburg Week- which is under the censorship of the police-master Baron Taube, is married and has two children, is growing rich and getting fat and elderly, and lives in a ”sub stantial way.” He says he has no time to be bored. He advised me to visit the museum, the factories, and the mines; I thanked him for his advice. He invited me to tea to-morrow evening; I invited him to dine with me. He did not invite me to dinner, and altogether did not press me very much to visit him. From this mother may conclude that the relations’ heart is not soft ened.... Relations are a race in which I take no interest. There is snow in the street, and I have pur posely let down the blind over the windows so as not to see the Asiatic sight. I am sitting here waiting for an answer from Tyumen to my telegram. I telegraphed: ”Tyumen. Kurbatov steamer line. Reply paid. Inform me when the passenger steamer starts Tomsk.” It depends on the answer whether I go by steamer or gallop ﬁfteen hundred versts in the slush of the thaw. All night long they beat on sheets of iron at every corner here. You need a head of iron not to go crazy from the incessant clanging. To-day I tried to make myself coffee. The result was a horrid mess. I just drank it with a shrug. I looked at ﬁve sheets, handled them, and did not take one. I am going to-day to buy rubber overshoes. * * * * * Shall I ﬁnd a letter from you at Irkutsk? Ask Lika not to leave such big margins in her letters. Your Homo Sachaliensis, A. CHEKHOV. TO MADAME KISELYOV. THE BANK OF THE IRTYSH, May 7, 1890. My greetings, honoured Marya Vladimirovna! I meant to write you a farewell letter from Moscow, but I had not time; I write to you now sitting in a hut on the bank of the Irtysh. It is night. This is how I have come to be here. I am driving across the plain of Siberia. I have already driven 715 versts; I have been transformed from head to foot into a great mar tyr. This morning a keen cold wind began blow ing, and it began drizzling with the most de testable rain. I must observe that there is no spring yet in Siberia. The earth is brown, the trees are bare, and there are white patches of snow wherever one looks; I wear my fur coat and felt overboots day and night.... Well, the wind has been blowing since early morning.... Heavy leaden clouds, dull brown earth, mud, rain, wind.... Brrr! I drive on and on.... I drive on endlessly, and the weather does not improve. Towards evening I am told at the sta tion I can’t go on further, as everything is under water, the bridges have been carried away, and so on. Knowing how fond these drivers are of frightening one with the elements so as to keep the traveller for the night (it is to their inter est), I did not believe them, and ordered them to harness the three horses; and now–alas for me!–I had not driven more than ﬁve versts when I saw the land on the bank of the Irtysh all cov ered with great lakes, the road disappeared un der water, and the bridges on the road really had been swept away or had decayed. I was prevented from turning back partly by obsti nacy and partly by the desire to get out of these dreary parts as quickly as possible. We began driving through the lakes.... My God, I have never experienced anything like it in my life! The cutting wind, the cold, the loathsome rain, and one had to get out of the chaise (not a cov ered one), if you please, and hold the horses: at each little bridge one could only lead the horses over one at a time.... What had I come to? Where was I? All around, desert, dreariness; the bare sullen bank of the Irtysh in sight.... We drive into the very biggest lake. Now I should be glad to turn back, but it is not easy.... We drive on a long strip of land ... the strip comes to an end–we go splash! Again a strip of land, again a splash.... My hands were numb, and the wild ducks seemed jeering at us and ﬂoated in huge ﬂocks over our heads.... It got dark. The driver said nothing–he was bewildered. But at last we reached the last strip that separated the Irtysh from the lake.... The sloping bank of the Irtysh was nearly three feet above the level; it was of clay, bare, hollowed out, and looked slippery. The water was muddy.... White waves splashed on the clay, but the Irtysh itself made no roar or din, but gave forth a strange sound as though someone were nailing up a cofﬁn under the wa ter.... The further bank was a ﬂat, disconsolate plain.... You often dream of the Bozharovsky pool; in the same way now I shall dream of the Irtysh.... But behold a ferry. We must be ferried across to the other side. A peasant shrinking from the rain comes out of a hut, and tells us that the ferry cannot cross now as it is too windy.... (The ferries are worked by oars). He advises us to wait for calm weather.... And so I am sitting at night in a hut on a lake at the very edge of the Irtysh. I feel a penetrat ing dampness to the very marrow of my bones, and a loneliness in my soul; I hear my Irtysh banging on the cofﬁns and the wind howling, and wonder where I am, why I am here. In the next room the peasants who work the ferry and my driver are asleep. They are good natured people. But if they were bad people they could perfectly well rob me and drown me in the Irtysh. The hut is the only one on the river bank; there would be no witnesses. The road to Tomsk is absolutely free from danger as far as brigands are concerned. It isn’t the fashion even to talk of robbery. There is no stealing even from travellers. When you go into a hut you can leave your things outside and they will all be safe. But they very nearly did kill me all the same. Imagine the night just before dawn.... I was driving along in a chaise, thinking and think ing.... All at once I see coming ﬂying towards us at full gallop a post-cart with three horses; my driver had hardly time to turn to the right, the three horses dashed by, and I noticed in it the driver who had to take it back.... Be hind it came another, also at full speed; we had turned to the right, it turned to the left. ”We shall smash into each other,” ﬂashed into my mind ... one instant, and–there was a crash, the horses were mixed up in a black mass, my chaise was rearing in the air, and I was rolling on the ground with all my bags and boxes on the top of me. I leap up and see–a third troika dashing upon us.... My mother must have been praying for me that night, I suppose. If I had been asleep, or if the third troika had come immediately after the second, I should have been crushed to death or maimed. It appeared the foremost driver lashed on the horses, while the drivers in the second and the third carts were asleep and did not see us. The collision was followed by the blankest amazement on both sides, then a storm of fe rocious abuse. The traces were torn, the shafts were broken, the yokes were lying about on the road.... Ah, how the drivers swore! At night, in that swearing turbulent crew, I felt in utter solitude such as I have never felt before in my life.... But my paper is running out. TO HIS SISTER. THE VILLAGE OF YAR, 45 VERSTS FROM TOMSK, May 14, 1890. My glorious mother, my splendid Masha, my sweet Misha, and all my household! At Ekater inburg I got my reply telegram from Tyumen. ”The ﬁrst steamer to Tomsk goes on the 18th May.” This meant that, whether I liked it or not, I must do the journey with horses. So I did. I drove out of Tyumen on the third of May af ter spending in Ekaterinburg two or three days, which I devoted to the repair of my coughing and haemorrhoidal person. Besides the pub lic posting service, one can get private drivers that take one across Siberia. I chose the latter: it is just the same. They put me, the servant of God, into a basketwork chaise and drove me with two horses; one sits in the basket like a goldﬁnch, looking at God’s world and think ing of nothing.... The plain of Siberia begins, I think, from Ekaterinburg, and ends goodness knows where; I should say it is very like our South Russian Steppe, except for the little birch copses here and there and the cold wind that stings one’s cheeks. Spring has not begun yet. There is no green at all, the woods are bare, the snow has not thawed everywhere. There is opaque ice on the lakes. On the ninth of May there was a hard frost, and to-day, the four teenth, snow has fallen to the depth of three or four inches. No one speaks of spring but the ducks. Ah, what masses of ducks! Never in my life have I seen such abundance. They ﬂy over one’s head, they ﬂy up close to the chaise, swim on the lakes and in the pools–in short, with the poorest sort of gun I could have shot a thou sand in one day. One can hear the wild geese calling.... There are lots of them here too. One often comes upon a string of cranes or swans.... Snipe and woodcock ﬂutter about in the birch copses. The hares which are not eaten or shot here, stand on their hindlegs, and, pricking up their ears, watch the passer-by with an inquis itive stare without the slightest misgiving. They are so often running across the road that to see them doing so is not considered a bad omen. It’s cold driving ...; I have my fur coat on. My body is all right, but my feet are freezing. I wrap them in the leather overcoat-but it is no use.... I have two pairs of breeches on. Well, one drives on and on.... Telegraph poles, pools, birch copses ﬂash by. Here we overtake some emigrants, then an etape.... We meet tramps with pots on their back; these gentry prome nade all over the plain of Siberia without hin drance. One time they will murder some poor old woman to take her petticoat for their leg wrappers; at another they will strip from the verst post the metal plate with the number on it–it might be useful; at another will smash the head of some beggar or knock out the eyes of some brother exile; but they never touch trav ellers. Altogether, travelling here is absolutely safe as far as brigands are concerned. Neither the post-drivers nor the private ones from Tyu men to Tomsk remember an instance of any things being stolen from a traveller. When you reach a station you leave your things outside; if you ask whether they won’t be stolen, they merely smile in answer. It is not the thing even to speak of robbery and murder on the road. I believe, if I were to lose my money in the sta tion or in the chaise, the driver would certainly give it me if he found it, and would not boast of having done so. Altogether the people here are good and kindly, and have excellent traditions. Their rooms are simply furnished but clean, with claims to luxury; the beds are soft, all feather mattresses and big pillows. The ﬂoors are painted or covered with home-made linen rugs. The explanation of this, of course, is their prosperity, the fact that a family has sixteen dessyatins [Footnote: I.e., about 48 acres.] of black earth, and that excellent wheat grows in this black earth. (Wheaten ﬂour costs thirty kopecks a -pood- here. [Footnote: I.e., about 7-1/2d. for 36 lb.]) But it cannot all be put down to prosperity and being well fed. One must give some of the credit to their manner of life. When you go at night into a room where people are asleep, the nose is not aware of any stufﬁness or ”Russian smell.” It is true one old woman when she handed me a teaspoon wiped it on the back of her skirt; but they don’t set you down to drink tea without a tablecloth, and they don’t search in each other’s heads in your presence, they don’t put their ﬁngers inside the glass when they hand you milk or water; the crockery is clean, the kvass is transparent as beer–in fact, there is a cleanliness of which our Little Russians can only dream, yet the Little Russians are far and away cleaner than the Great Russians! They make the most delicious bread here–I over-ate myself with it at ﬁrst. The pies and pancakes and fritters and the fancy rolls, which remind one of the spongy Little Rus sian ring rolls, are very good too.... But all the rest is not for the European stomach. For instance, I am regaled everywhere with ”duck broth.” It’s perfectly disgusting, a muddy-looking liquid with bits of wild duck and uncooked onion ﬂoating in it.... I once asked them to make me some soup from meat and to fry me some perch. They gave me soup too salt, dirty, with hard bits of skin instead of meat; and the perch was cooked with the scales on it. They make their cabbage soup from salt meat; they roast it too. They have just served me some salt meat roasted: it’s most repulsive; I chewed at it and gave it up. They drink brick tea. It is a decoc tion of sage and beetles–that’s what it is like in taste and appearance. By the way, I brought from Ekaterinburg a quarter of a pound of tea, ﬁve pounds of sugar, and three lemons. It was not enough tea and there is nowhere to buy any. In these scurvy little towns even the government ofﬁcials drink brick tea, and even the best shops don’t keep tea at more than one rouble ﬁfty kopecks a pound. I have to drink the sage brew. The distance apart of the posting stations depends on the distance of the nearest villages from each other–that is, 20 to 40 versts. The villages here are large, there are no little ham lets. There are churches and schools every where, the huts are of wood and there are some with two storeys. Towards the evening the road and the pud dles begin to freeze, and at night there is a regular frost, one wants an extra fur coat ... Brrr! It’s jolting, for the mud is transformed into hard lumps. One’s soul is shaken inside out.... Towards daybreak one is fearfully ex hausted by the cold, by the jolting and the jin gle of the bells: one has a passionate longing for warmth and a bed. While they change horses one curls up in some corner and at once drops asleep, and a minute later the driver pulls at one’s sleeve and says: ”Get up, friend, it is time to start.” On the second night I had acute toothache in my heels. It was unbearably painful. I wondered whether they were frostbitten. I can’t write more though. The ”president,” that is the district police inspector, has come. We have made acquaintance and are beginning to talk. Goodbye till to-morrow. TOMSK, May 16. It seems my strong boots were the cause, be ing too tight at the back. My sweet Misha, if you ever have any children, which I have no doubt you will, the advice I bequeath to them is not to run after cheap goods. Cheapness in Russian goods is the label of worthlessness. To my mind it is better to go barefoot than to wear cheap boots. Picture my agony! I keep getting out of the chaise, sitting down on damp ground and taking off my boots to rest my heels. So comfortable in the frost! I had to buy felt over boots in Ishim.... So I drove in felt boots till 343 they collapsed from the mud and the damp. In the morning between ﬁve and six o’clock one drinks tea at a hut. Tea on a journey is a great blessing. I know its value now, and drink it with the fury of a Yanov. It warms one through and drives away sleep; one eats a lot of bread with it, and in the absence of other nourishment, bread has to be eaten in great quantities; that is why peasants eat so much bread and farinaceous food. One drinks tea and talks with the peasant women, who are sensible, tenderhearted, industrious, as well as being devoted mothers and more free than in European Russia; their husbands don’t abuse or beat them, because they are as tall, as strong, and as clever as their lords and masters are. They act as drivers when their husbands are away from home; they like making jokes. They are not severe with their children, they spoil them. The children sleep on soft beds and lie as long as they like, drink tea and eat with the men, and scold the latter when they laugh at them affectionately. There is no diphthe ria. Malignant smallpox is prevalent here, but strange to say, it is less contagious than in other parts of the world; two or three catch it and die and that is the end of the epidemic. There are no hospitals or doctors. The doctoring is done by feldshers. Bleeding and cupping are done on a grandiose, brutal scale. I examined a Jew with cancer in the liver. The Jew was exhausted, hardly breathing, but that did not prevent the feldsher from cupping him twelve times. Apropos of the Jews. Here they till the land, work as drivers and ferry-men, trade and are called Krestyany, [Translator’s Note: I.e., Peasants, literally ”Christians.” ] because they are -de jure- and -de facto- Krestyany. They enjoy universal respect, and according to the ”president” they are not infrequently chosen as village elders. I saw a tall thin Jew who scowled with disgust and spat when the ”president” told indecent stories: a chaste soul; his wife makes splendid ﬁsh-soup. The wife of the Jew who had cancer regaled me with pike caviare and with most delicious white bread. One hears nothing of exploitation by the Jews. And, by the way, about the Poles. There are a few exiles here, sent from Poland in 1864. They are good, hospitable, and very reﬁned people. Some of them live in a very wealthy way; others are very poor, and serve as clerks at the stations. Upon the amnesty the former went back to their own country, but soon returned to Siberia again– here they are better off; the latter dream of their native land, though they are old and inﬁrm. At Ishim a wealthy Pole, Pan Zalyessky, who has a daughter like Sasha Kiselyov, for a rou ble gave me an excellent dinner and a room to sleep in; he keeps an inn and has become a money-grubber to the marrow of his bones; he ﬂeeces everyone, but yet one feels the Polish gentleman in his manner, in the way the meals are served, in everything. He does not go back to Poland through greed, and through greed endures snow till St. Nikolay’s day; when he dies his daughter, who was born at Ishim, will remain here for ever and so will multiply the black eyes and soft features in Siberia! This ca sual intermixture of blood is to the good, for the Siberian people are not beautiful. There are no dark-haired people. Perhaps you would like me to write about the Tatars? Certainly. There are very few of them here. They are good people. In the province of Kazan everyone speaks well of them, even the priests, and in Siberia they are ”better than the Russians” as the ”president” said to me in the presence of Russians, who assented to this by their silence. My God, how rich Russia is in good people! If it were not for the cold which deprives Siberia of the summer, and if it were not for the ofﬁcials who corrupt the peasants and the exiles, Siberia would be the richest and happiest of lands. I have nothing for dinner. Sensible people usually take twenty pounds of provisions when they go to Tomsk. It seems I was a fool and so I have fed for a fortnight on nothing but milk and eggs, which are boiled so that the yolk is hard and the white is soft. One is sick of such fare in two days. I have only twice had dinner during the whole journey, not counting the Jewess’s ﬁsh-soup, which I swallowed after I had had enough to eat with my tea. I have not had any vodka: the Siberian vodka is disgusting, and indeed, I got out of the habit of taking it while I was on the way to Ekaterinburg. One ought to drink vodka: it stimulates the brain, dull and apathetic from travelling, which makes one stupid and feeble. -Stop!- I can’t write: the editor of the -Sibirsky Vyestnik-, N., a local Nozdryov, a drunkard and a rake, has come to make my acquaintance. N. has drunk some beer and gone away. I continue. For the ﬁrst three days of my journey my col larbones, my shoulders and my vertebrae ached from the shaking and jolting. I couldn’t stand or sit or lie.... But on the other hand, all pains in my head and chest have vanished, my ap petite has developed incredibly, and my haem orrhoids have subsided completely. The over strain, the constant worry with luggage and so on, and perhaps the farewell drinking parties in Moscow, had brought on spitting of blood in the mornings, which induced something like depression, arousing gloomy thoughts, but to wards the end of the journey it has left off; now I haven’t even a cough. It is a long time since I have coughed so little as now, after being for a fortnight in the open air. After the ﬁrst three days of travelling my body grew used to the jolting, and in time I did not notice the com ing of midday and then of evening and night. The time ﬂew by rapidly as it does in serious illness. You think it is scarcely midday when the peasants say–”You ought to put up for the night, sir, or we may lose our way in the dark”; you look at your watch, and it is actually eight o’clock. They drive quickly, but the speed is noth ing remarkable. Probably I have come upon the roads in bad condition, and in winter travelling would have been quicker. They dash uphill at a gallop, and before setting off and before the driver gets on the box, the horses need two or three men to hold them. The horses remind me of the ﬁre brigade horses in Moscow. One day we nearly ran over an old woman, and an other time almost dashed into an etape. Now, would you like an adventure for which I am in debted to Siberian driving? Only I beg mother not to wail and lament, for it all ended well. On the 6th of May towards daybreak I was be ing driven with two horses by a very nice old man. It was a little chaise, I was drowsy, and, to while away the time, watched the gleaming of zigzagging lights in the ﬁelds and birch copses– it was last year’s grass on ﬁre; it is their habit here to burn it. Suddenly I hear the swift rat tle of wheels, a post-cart at full speed comes ﬂying towards us like a bird, my old man has tens to move to the right, the three horses dash by, and I see in the dusk a huge heavy post cart with a driver for the return journey in it. It was followed by a second cart also going at full speed. We made haste to move aside to the right. To my great amazement and alarm the approaching cart moved not to its right, but its left ... I hardly had time to think, ”Good heav ens! we shall run into each other,” when there was a desperate crash, the horses were mixed up in a dark blur, the yokes fell off, my chaise reared up into the air, and I ﬂew to the ground, and my luggage on the top of me. But that was not all ... A third cart was dashing upon us. This really ought to have smashed me and my luggage to atoms but, thank God! I was not asleep, I broke no bones in the fall, and man aged to jump up so quickly that I was able to get out of the way. ”Stop,” I bawled to the third cart, ”Stop!” The third dashed up to the second and stopped. Of course if I were able to sleep in a chaise, or if the third cart had followed in stantly on the second, I should certainly have come back a cripple or a headless horseman. The results of the collision were broken shafts, torn traces, yokes and luggage scattered on the ground, the horses scared and harassed, and the alarming feeling that we had just been in danger. It turned out that the ﬁrst driver had lashed up the horses; while in the other two carts the drivers were asleep, and the horses followed the ﬁrst team with no one controlling them. On recovering from the shock, my old man and the other three men fell to abusing each other ferociously. Oh, how they swore! I thought it would end in a ﬁght. You can’t imagine the feeling of isolation in the middle of that savage swearing crew in the open coun try, just before dawn, in sight of the ﬁres far and near consuming the grass, but not warm ing the cold night air! Oh, how heavy my heart was! One listened to the swearing, looked at the broken shafts and at one’s tormented lug gage, and it seemed as though one were cast away in another world, as though one would be crushed in a moment.... After an hour’s abuse my old man began splicing together the shafts with cord and tying up the traces; my straps were forced into the service too. We got to the station somehow, crawling along and stopping from time to time. After ﬁve or six days rain with high winds began. It rained day and night. The leather overcoat came to the rescue and kept me safe from rain and wind. It’s a wonderful coat. The mud was almost impassable, the drivers began to be unwilling to go on at night. But what was worst of all, and what I shall never for get, was crossing the rivers. One reaches a river at night.... One begins shouting and so does the driver.... Rain, wind, pieces of ice glide down the river, there is a sound of splashing.... And to add to our gaiety there is the cry of a heron. Herons live on the Siberian rivers, so it seems they don’t consider the climate but the geographical position.... Well, an hour later, in the darkness, a huge ferry-boat of the shape of a barge comes into sight with huge oars that look like the pincers of a crab. The ferry-men are a rowdy set, for the most part exiles ban ished here by the verdict of society for their vi cious life. They use insufferably bad language, shout, and ask for money for vodka.... The fer rying across takes a long, long time ... an ago nizingly long time. The ferryboat crawls. Again the feeling of loneliness, and the heron seems calling on purpose, as though he means to say: ”Don’t be frightened, old man, I am here, the Lintvaryovs have sent me here from the Psyol.” On the 7th of May when I asked for horses the driver said the Irtysh had overﬂowed its banks and ﬂooded the meadows, that Kuzma had set off the day before and had difﬁculty in getting back, and that I could not go, but must wait.... I asked: ”Wait till when?” An swer: ”The Lord only knows!” That was vague. Besides, I had taken a vow to get rid on the journey of two of my vices which were a source of considerable expense, trouble, and inconve nience; I mean my readiness to give in, and be overpersuaded. I am quick to agree, and so I have had to travel anyhow, sometimes to pay double and to wait for hours at a time. I had taken to refusing to agree and to believe– and my sides have ached less. For instance, they bring out not a proper carriage but a com mon, jolting cart. I refuse to travel in the jolting cart, I insist, and the carriage is sure to ap pear, though they may have declared that there was no such thing in the whole village, and so on. Well, I suspected that the Irtysh ﬂoods were invented simply to avoid driving me by night through the mud. I protested and told them to start. The peasant who had heard of the ﬂoods from Kuzma, and had not himself seen them, scratched himself and consented; the old men encouraged him, saying that when they were young and used to drive, they were afraid of nothing. We set off. Much rain, a vicious wind, cold ... and felt boots on my feet. Do you know what felt boots are like when they are soaked? They are like boots of jelly. We drive on and on, and behold, there lies stretched be fore my eyes an immense lake from which the earth appears in patches here and there, and bushes stand out: these are the ﬂooded mead ows. In the distance stretches the steep bank of the Irtysh, on which there are white streaks of snow.... We begin driving through the lake. We might have turned back, but obstinacy pre vented me, and an incomprehensible impulse of deﬁance mastered me–that impulse which made me bathe from the yacht in the middle of the Black Sea and has impelled me to not a few acts of folly ... I suppose it is a special neuro sis. We drive on and make for the little islands and strips of land. The direction is indicated by bridges and planks; they have been washed away. To cross by them we had to unharness the horses and lead them over one by one.... The driver unharnesses the horses, I jump out into the water in my felt boots and hold them.... A pleasant diversion! And the rain and wind.... Queen of Heaven! At last we get to a little island where there stands a hut without a roof.... Wet horses are wandering about in the wet dung. A peasant with a long stick comes out of the hut and undertakes to guide us. He measures the depth of the water with his stick, and tries the ground. He led us out–God bless him for it!–on to a long strip of ground which he called ”the ridge.” He instructs us that we must keep to the right–or perhaps it was to the left, I don’t remember–and get on to another ridge. This we do. My felt boots are soaking and squelch ing, my socks are snufﬂing. The driver says nothing and clicks dejectedly to his horses. He would gladly turn back, but by now it was late, it was dark.... At last–oh, joy!–we reach the Ir tysh.... The further bank is steep but the near bank is sloping. The near one is hollowed out, looks slippery, hateful, not a trace of vegeta tion.... The turbid water splashes upon it with crests of white foam, and dashes back again as though disgusted at touching the uncouth slippery bank on which it seems that none but toads and the souls of murderers could live.... The Irtysh makes no loud or roaring sound, but it sounds as though it were hammering on cofﬁns in its depths.... A damnable impression! The further bank is steep, dark brown, deso late.... There is a hut; the ferry-men live in it. One of them comes out and announces that it is im possible to work the ferry as a storm has come up. The river, they said, was wide, and the wind was strong. And so I had to stay the night at the hut.... I remember the night. The snoring of the ferry-men and my driver, the roar of the wind, the patter of the rain, the mutterings of the Irtysh.... Before going to sleep I wrote a let ter to Marya Vladimirovna; I was reminded of the Bozharovsky pool. In the morning they were unwilling to ferry me across: there was a high wind. We had to row across in the boat. I am rowed across the river, while the rain comes lashing down, the wind blows, my luggage is drenched and my felt boots, which had been dried overnight in the oven, become jelly again. Oh, the darling leather coat! If I did not catch cold I owe it en tirely to that. When I come back you must re ward it with an anointing of tallow or castor-oil. On the bank I sat for a whole hour on my port manteau waiting for horses to come from the village. I remember it was very slippery clam bering up the bank. In the village I warmed myself and had some tea. Some exiles came to beg for alms. Every family makes forty pounds of wheaten ﬂour into bread for them every day. It’s a kind of forced tribute. The exiles take the bread and sell it for drink at the tavern. One exile, a tattered, closely shaven old man, whose eyes had been knocked out in the tavern by his fellow-exiles, hearing that there was a traveller in the room and tak ing me for a merchant, began singing and re peating the prayers. He recited the prayer for health and for the rest of the soul, and sang the Easter hymn, ”Let the Lord arise,” and ”With thy Saints, O Lord”–goodness knows what he didn’t sing! Then he began telling lies, saying that he was a Moscow merchant. I noticed how this drunken creature despised the peasants upon whom he was living. On the 11th I drove with posting horses. I read the books of complaints at the posting sta tion in my boredom. ... On the 12th of May they would not give me horses, saying that I could not drive, be cause the River Ob had overﬂowed its banks and ﬂooded all the meadows. They advised me to turn off the track as far as Krasny Yar; then go by boat twelve versts to Dubrovin, and at Dubrovin you can get posting horses.... I drove with private horses as far as Krasny Yar. I ar rive in the morning; I am told there is a boat, but that I must wait a little as the grandfather had sent the workman to row the president’s secretary to Dubrovin in it. Very well, we will wait.... An hour passes, a second, a third.... Midday arrives, then evening.... Allah kerim, what a lot of tea I drank, what a lot of bread I ate, what a lot of thoughts I thought! And what a lot I slept! Night came on and still no boat.... Early morning came.... At last at nine o’clock the workmen returned.... Thank heaven, we are aﬂoat at last! And how pleasant it is! The air is still, the oarsmen are good, the islands are beautiful.... The ﬂoods caught men and cat tle unawares and I see peasant women rowing in boats to the islands to milk the cows. And the cows are lean and dejected. There is ab solutely no grass for them, owing to the cold. I was rowed twelve versts. At the station of Dubrovin I had tea, and for tea they gave me, can you imagine! wafﬂes.... I suppose the woman of the house was an exile or the wife of an exile. At the next station an old clerk, a Pole, to whom I gave some antipyrin for his headache, com plained of his poverty, and said Count Sapyega, a Pole who was a gentleman-in-waiting at the Austrian Court, and who assisted his fellow countrymen, had lately arrived there on his way to Siberia, ”He stayed near the station,” said the clerk, ”and I didn’t know it! Holy Mother! He would have helped me! I wrote to him at Vi enna, but I got no answer, ...” and so on. Why am I not a Sapyega? I would send this poor fellow to his own country. On the 14th of May again they would not give me horses. The Tom was ﬂooded. How vex atious! It meant not mere vexation but despair! Fifty versts from Tomsk and how unexpected! A woman in my place would have sobbed. Some kind-hearted people found a solution for me. ”Drive on, sir, as far as the Tom, it is only six versts from here; there they will row you across to Yar, and Ilya Markovitch will take you on from there to Tomsk.” I hired a horse and drove to the Tom, to the place where the boat was to be. I drove–there was no boat. They told me it had just set off with the post, and was hardly likely to return as there was such a wind. I began waiting.... The ground was covered with snow, it rained and hailed and the wind blew.... One hour passed, a second, and no boat. Fate was laughing at me. I returned to the station. There the driver of the mail with three posting horses was just setting off for the Tom. I told him there was no boat. He stayed. Fate re warded me; the clerk in response to my hesitat ing inquiry whether there was anything to eat told me the woman of the house had some cab bage soup. Oh, rapture! Oh, radiant day! And the daughter of the house did in fact give me some excellent cabbage soup, with some capi tal meat with roast potatoes and cucumbers. I have not had such a dinner since I was at Pan Zalyessky’s. After the potatoes I let myself go, and made myself some coffee. Towards evening the mail driver, an elderly man who had evidently endured a good deal in his day, and who did not venture to sit down in my presence, began preparing to set off to the Tom. I did the same. We drove off. As soon as we reached the river the boat came into sight–a long boat: I have never dreamed of a boat so long. While the post was being loaded on to the boat I witnessed a strange phenomenon–there was a peal of thunder, a queer thing in a cold wind, with snow on the ground. They loaded up and rowed off. My sweet Misha, forgive me for being so rejoiced that I did not bring you with me! How sensible it was of me not to take anyone with me! At ﬁrst our boat ﬂoated over a meadow near willow-bushes.... As is com mon before a storm or during a storm, a vio lent wind suddenly sprang up on the water and stirred up the waves. The boatman who was sitting at the helm advised our waiting in the willow-bushes till the storm was over. They an swered him that if the storm grew worse, they might stay in the willow-bushes till night and be drowned all the same. They proceeded to settle it by -majority of votes-, and decided to row on. An evil mocking fate is mine. Oh, why these jests? We rowed on in silence, concen trating our thoughts.... I remember the ﬁgure of the mail-driver, a man of varied experiences. I remember the little soldier who suddenly be came as crimson as cherry juice. I thought, if the boat upsets I will ﬂing off my fur coat and my leather coat ... then my felt boots, then ... and so on.... But the bank came nearer and nearer, one’s soul felt easier and easier, one’s heart throbbed with joy, one heaved deep sighs as though one could breathe freely at last, and leapt on the wet slippery bank.... Thank God! At Ilya Markovitch’s, the converted Jew’s, I was told that I could not drive at night; the road was bad; that I must remain till next day. Very good, I stayed. After tea I sat down to write you this letter, interrupted by the visit of the ”president.” The president is a rich mixture of Nozdryov, Hlestakov and a cur. A drunkard, a rake, a liar, a singer, a story-teller, and with all that a good-natured man. He had brought with him a big trunk stuffed full of business papers, a bedstead and mattress, a gun, and a secretary. The secretary is an excellent, well educated man, a protesting liberal who has stud ied in Petersburg, and is free in his ideas; I don’t know how he came to Siberia, he is in fected to the marrow of his bones with every sort of disease, and is taking to drink, thanks to his principal, who calls him Kolya. The repre sentative of authority sends for a cordial. ”Doc tor,” he bawls, ”drink another glass, I beseech you humbly!” Of course, I drink it. The repre sentative of authority drinks soundly, lies out rageously, uses shameless language. We go to bed. In the morning a cordial is sent for again. They swill the cordial till ten o’clock and at last they go. The converted Jew, Ilya Markovitch, whom the peasants here idolize–so I was told– gave me horses to drive to Tomsk. The ”president,” the secretary and I got into the same conveyance. All the way the ”presi dent” told lies, drank out of the bottle, boasted that he did not take bribes, raved about the scenery, and shook his ﬁst at the tramps that he met. We drove ﬁfteen versts, then halt! The village of Brovkino.... We stop near a Jew’s shop and go to take ”rest and refreshment.” The Jew runs to fetch us a cordial while his wife makes us some ﬁsh-soup, of which I have written to you already. The ”president” gave orders that the -sotsky-, the -desyatsky-, and the road con tractor should come to him, and in his drunk enness began reproving them, not the least re strained by my presence. He swore like a Tatar. I soon parted from the ”president,” and on the evening of the 15th of May by an appalling road reached Tomsk. During the last two days I have only done seventy versts; you can imagine what the roads are like! In Tomsk the mud was almost impassable. Of the town and the manner of living here I will write in a day or two, but good-bye for now–I am tired of writing. * * * * * There are no poplars. The Kuvshinnikov Gen eral was lying. I have seen no nightingales. There are magpies and cuckoos. I received a telegram of eighty words from Suvorin to-day. Excuse this letter’s being like a hotch-potch. It’s incoherent, but I can’t help it. Sitting in an hotel room one can’t write better. Excuse its being long, It’s not my fault. My pen ran away with me–besides, I wanted to go on talking to you. It’s three o’clock in the night. My hand is tired. The wick of the candle wants snufﬁng, I can hardly see. Write to me at Sahalin every four or ﬁve days. It seems that the post goes there, not only by sea but across Siberia, so I shall get letters frequently. * * * * * All the Tomsk people tell me that there has not been a spring so cold and rainy as this one since 1842. Half Tomsk is under water. My luck! I am eating sweets. I shall have to stay at Tomsk till the rains are over. They say the road to Irkutsk is awful. TOMSK, May 20. It is Trinity Sunday with you, while with us even the willow has not yet come out, and there is still snow on the banks of the Tom. To morrow I am starting for Irkutsk. I am rested. There is no need for hurry, as steam navigation on Lake Baikal does not begin till the 10th of June; but I shall go all the same. I am alive and well, my money is safe; I have a slight pain in my right eye. It aches. ... Everyone advises me to go back across America, as they say one may die of boredom in the Volunteer Fleet; it’s all military discipline 373 and red tape regulations, and they don’t often touch at a port. To ﬁll up my time I have been writing some impressions of my journey and sending them to -Novoye Vremya-; you will read them soon after the 10th of June. I write a little about every thing, chit-chat. I don’t write for glory but from a ﬁnancial point of view, and in consideration of the money I have had in advance. Tomsk is a very dull town. To judge from the drunkards whose acquaintance I have made, and from the intellectual people who have come to the hotel to pay their respects to me, the in habitants are very dull too. * * * * * In two and a half days I shall be in Kras noyarsk, and in seven or eight in Irkutsk. It’s ﬁfteen hundred versts to Irkutsk. I have made myself coffee and am just going to drink it. ... After Tomsk the Taiga begins. We shall see it. My greeting to all the Lintvaryovs and to our old Maryushka. I beg mother not to worry and not to put faith in bad dreams. Have the radishes succeeded? There are none here at all. Keep well, don’t worry about money–there will be plenty; don’t try to spend less and spoil the summer for yourselves. TO A. S. SUVORIN. TOMSK, May 20, 1890. Greetings to you at last from Siberia, dear Alexey Sergeyevitch! I have missed you and our corre spondence terribly. I will begin from the beginning, however. At Tyumen I was told the ﬁrst steamer to Tomsk went on the 18th of May. I had to do the jour ney with horses. For the ﬁrst three days ev ery joint and sinew ached, but afterwards I got 377 used to the jolting and felt no more aches. Only the lack of sleep, the continual worry over the luggage, the jolting and the fasting brought on spitting of blood when I coughed, and this de pressed my spirits, which were none too grand before. For the ﬁrst few days it was bearable but then a cold wind began to blow, the win dows of heaven were opened, the rivers ﬂooded the meadows and roads, I was continually hav ing to change my chaise for a boat. You’ll read of my struggles with the ﬂoods and the mud in the article I enclose. I did not mention in it that my big high boots were tight, and that I waded through the mud and the water in my felt boots, and that my felt boots were soaked to jelly. The road was so abominable that dur ing the last two days of my journey I only did seventy versts. When I set off I promised to send you notes of my journey after Tomsk, since the road be tween Tyumen and Tomsk has been described a thousand times already. But in your telegram you have expressed the desire to get my im pressions of Siberia as quickly as possible, and have even had the cruelty, sir, to reproach me with lapse of memory, as though I had forgot ten you. It was absolutely impossible to write on the road. I kept a brief diary in pencil and can offer you now only what is written in that diary. To avoid writing at great length and get ting mixed up, I divided all my impressions into chapters. I am sending you six chapters. They are written -for you personally-. I wrote for you only, and so have not been afraid of be ing too subjective, and have not been afraid of there being more of Chekhov’s feelings and thoughts than of Siberia in them. If you ﬁnd some lines interesting and worth printing, give them a proﬁtable publicity, signing them with my name and printing them in separate chap ters, a tablespoonful once an hour. The general title can be -From Siberia-, then -From Trans Baikalia-, then -From the Amur-, and so on. You shall have another helping from Irkutsk, for which I am starting to-morrow. I shall not be less than ten days on the journey–the road is bad. I shall send you a few chapters again, and shall send them whether you intend to print them or not. Read them and when you are tired of them telegraph to me ”Shut up!” I have been as hungry as a dog the whole way. I stuffed myself with bread so as not to dream of turbot, asparagus, and suchlike. I even dreamed of buckwheat porridge. I have dreamed of it for hours at a time. At Tyumen I bought some sausage for the journey, but what sausage! When you take a bit in your mouth there’s a sniff as though you had gone into a stable at the very moment when the coachmen were taking off their leg wrappers; when you begin chewing it, you feel as though you had fastened your teeth into a dog’s tail deﬁled with pitch. Tfoo! I ate some once or twice, and threw it away. I have had one telegram and the letter from you in which you write that you want to bring out an encyclopaedic dictionary. I don’t know why, but the news of that dictionary rejoiced me greatly. Do, my dear friend! If I am any use for working on it, I will devote November and December to you, and will spend those months in Petersburg. I will sit at it from morning till night. I made a fair copy of my notes at Tomsk in horrid hotel surroundings, but I took trouble about it and was not without a desire to please you. I thought, he must be bored and hot in Feodosia, let him read about the cold. These notes will come to you instead of a letter which has been taking shape in my head during the whole journey. In return you must send to me at Sahalin all your critical reviews except the ﬁrst two, which I have read; have Peshel’s ”Eth nology” sent me there too, except the ﬁrst two instalments, which I have already. The post to Sahalin goes both by sea and across Siberia, so if people write to me I shall get letters often. Don’t lose my address—Island of Sahalin, Alexandrovsky Post-. Oh, the expense! -Gewalt!- Thanks to the ﬂoods, I had to pay the drivers double and al most treble, for it has been ﬁendishly hard work. My trunk, a very charming article, has turned out unsuitable for the journey; it takes a lot of room, pokes one in the ribs, and rattles, and worst of all threatens to burst open. ”Don’t take boxes on long journeys!” good people said to me, but I remembered this advice only when I had gone half-way. Well, I am leaving my trunk to reside permanently at Tomsk, and am buy ing instead of it a sort of leather carcase, which has the advantage that it can be tied so as to form two halves at the bottom of the chaise as one likes. I paid sixteen roubles for it. Next point. To travel to the Amur, changing one’s conveyance at every station, is torture. You shatter both yourself and all your luggage. I was advised to buy a trap. I bought one to day for one hundred and thirty roubles. If I don’t succeed in selling it at Sryetensk, where my horse journey ends, I shall be in a ﬁx and shall howl aloud. To-day I dined with the edi tor of the -Sibirsky Vyestnik-, a local Nozdryov, a broad nature.... He drank to the tune of six roubles. Stop! They announce that the deputy police master wants to see me. What can it be?!? My alarm was unnecessary. The police of ﬁcer turns out to be devoted to literature and himself an author; he has come to pay his re spects to me. He went home to fetch his play, and I believe intends to regale me with it. He is just coming again and preventing me from writing to you.... ... My greetings to Nastyusha and Boris. I should be genuinely delighted for their satis faction to ﬂing myself into the jaws of a tiger and call them to my aid, but, alas! I haven’t reached the tigers here: the only furry animals I have seen so far in Siberia are many hares and one mouse. Stop! The police ofﬁcer has returned. He has not read me his drama though he brought it, but regaled me with a story. It’s not bad, only too local. He showed me a nugget of gold. He asked for some vodka. I don’t remember a single educated Siberian who has not asked for vodka on coming to see me. He told me he had a mistress, a married woman; he gave me a petition to the Tsar about divorce to read.... * * * * * How glad I am when I am forced to stop somewhere for the night! I no sooner roll into bed than I am asleep. Here, travelling and not sleeping at night, one prizes sleep above every thing. There is no greater enjoyment in life than sleep when one is sleepy. In Moscow, in Russia generally, I never was sleepy as I understand the word now. I went to bed simply because one had to. But now! Another observation. On a journey one has no desire for spirits. I can’t drink. I smoke a great deal. One’s mind does not work well. I cannot put my thoughts to gether. Time ﬂies rapidly, so that one scarcely notices it, from ten o’clock in the morning to seven o’clock in the evening. Evening comes quickly after morning. It’s just the same when one is seriously ill. The wind and the rain have made my face all scaly, and when I look in the looking-glass I don’t recognize my once noble features. I am not going to describe Tomsk. All the towns are alike in Russia. Tomsk is a dull and intemperate town. There are absolutely no good-looking women, and the disregard for jus tice is Asiatic. The town is remarkable for the fact that governors die in it. If my letters are short, careless, or dry, don’t be cross, for one cannot always be oneself on a journey and write as one wants to. The ink is bad, and there is always a hair or a splodge on one’s pen. TO HIS SISTER. KRASNOYARSK, May 28, 1890. What a deadly road! It was all we could do to crawl to Krasnoyarsk and my trap had to be repaired twice. The ﬁrst thing to be broken was the vertical piece of iron connecting the front of the carriage with the axle; then the so-called circle under the front broke. I have never in all my life seen such a road–such impassable mud and such an utterly neglected road. I am 389 going to write about its horrors to the -Novoye Vremya-, and so won’t talk about it now. The last three stations have been splendid; as one comes down to Krasnoyarsk one seems to be getting into a different world. You come out of the forest into a plain which is like our Donets steppe, but here the mountain ridges are grander. The sun shines its very best and the birch-trees are out, though three stations back the buds were not even bursting. Thank God, I have at last reached a summer in which there is neither rain nor a cold wind. Kras noyarsk is a picturesque, cultured town; com pared with it, Tomsk is ”a pig in a skull-cap and the acme of -mauvais ton-.” The streets are clean and paved, the houses are of stone and large, the churches are elegant. I am alive and perfectly well. My money is all right, and so are my things; I lost my woollen stockings but soon found them again. Apart from my trap, everything so far has been satisfactory and I have nothing to com plain of. Only I am spending an awful lot of money. Incompetence in the practical affairs of life is never felt so much as on a journey. I pay more than I need to, I do the wrong thing, and I say the wrong thing, and I am always expecting what does not happen. ... I shall be in Irkutsk in ﬁve or six days, shall spend as many days there, then drive on to Sryetensk–and that will be the end of my journey on land. For more than a fortnight I have been driving without a break, I think about nothing else, I live for nothing else; ev ery morning I see the sunrise from beginning to end. I’ve grown so used to it that it seems as though all my life I had been driving and strug gling with the muddy roads. When it does not rain, and there are no pits of mud on the road, one feels queer and even a little bored. And how ﬁlthy I am, what a rapscallion I look! What a state my luckless clothes are in! ... For mother’s information: I have still a jar and a half of coffee; I feed on locusts and wild honey; I shall dine to-day at Irkutsk. The further east one gets the dearer everything is. Rye ﬂour is seventy kopecks a -pood-, while on the other side of Tomsk it was twenty-ﬁve and twenty-seven kopecks per -pood-, and wheaten ﬂour thirty kopecks. The tobacco sold in Siberia is vile and loathsome; I tremble because mine is nearly done. ... I am travelling with two lieutenants and an army doctor who are all on their way to the Amur. So my revolver is after all quite super ﬂuous. In such company hell would have no terrors. We are just having tea at the station, and after tea we are going to have a look at the town. I should have no objection to living in Kras noyarsk. I can’t think why this is a favourite place for sending exiles to. * * * * * Your Homo Sachaliensis, A. CHEKHOV. TO HIS BROTHER ALEXANDR. IRKUTSK, June 5, 1890. MY EUROPEAN BROTHER, It is, of course, unpleasant to live in Siberia; but better to live in Siberia and feel oneself a man of moral worth, than to live in Petersburg with the reputation of a drunkard and a scoundrel. No reference to present company. * * * * * Siberia is a cold and long country. I drive on and on and see no end to it. I see little that is new or of interest, but I feel and experi ence a great deal. I have contended with ﬂooded rivers, with cold, with impassable mud, hunger and sleepiness: such sensations as you could not get for a million in Moscow! You ought to come to Siberia. Ask the authorities to exile you. The best of all Siberian towns is Irkutsk. Tomskis not worth a brass farthing, and the district towns are no better than the Kryepkaya in which you were so heedlessly born. What is most provoking, there is nothing to eat in the district towns, and oh dear, how conscious one is of that on the journey! You get to a town and feel ready to eat a mountain; you arrive and– alack!–no sausage, no cheese, no meat, no her ring even, but the same insipid eggs and milk as in the villages. On the whole I am satisﬁed with my expedi tion, and don’t regret having come. The travel ling is hard, but the resting after it is delightful. I rest with enjoyment. From Irkutsk I shall make for Baikal, which I shall cross by steamer; it’s a thousand ver sts from the Baikal to the Amur, and thence I shall go by steamer to the Paciﬁc, where the ﬁrst thing I shall do is to have a bath and eat oysters. I got here yesterday and went ﬁrst of all to have a bath, then to bed. Oh, how I slept! I never understood what sleep meant till now. * * * * * I bless you with both hands. Your Asiatic brother, A. CHEKHOV. TO A. N. PLESHTCHEYEV. IRKUTSK, June 5, 1890. A thousand greetings to you, dear Alexey Niko laevitch. At last I have vanquished the most difﬁcult three thousand versts; I am sitting in a decent hotel and can write. I have rigged my self out all in new things and, as far as possible, smart ones, for you cannot imagine how sick I 397 was of my big muddy boots, of my sheepskin smelling of tar, of my overcoat covered with bits of hay, of dust and crumbs in my pockets, and of my extremely dirty linen. I looked such a ragamufﬁn on the journey that even the tramps eyed me askance; and then, as ill luck would have it, the cold winds and rain chapped my face and made it scaly like a ﬁsh. Now at last I am a European again, and I am conscious of it all over. Well, what am I to write to you? It’s all so long and so vast that one doesn’t know where to begin. All my experiences in Siberia I divide into three periods. (1) From Tyumen to Tomsk, ﬁfteen hundred versts, terrible cold, day and night, sheepskin, felt boots, cold rains, winds and a desperate life-and-death struggle with the ﬂooded rivers. The rivers had ﬂooded the mead ows and roads, and I was constantly exchang ing my trap for a boat and ﬂoating like a Vene tian on a gondola; the boats, the waiting on the bank for them, the rowing across, etc., all that took up so much time that during the last two days before reaching Tomsk, in spite of all my efforts, I only did seventy versts instead of four or ﬁve hundred. There were, moreover, some very uneasy and unpleasant moments, espe cially when the wind rose and began to buffet the boat. (2) From Tomsk to Krasnoyarsk, ﬁve hundred versts, impassable mud, my chaise and I stuck in the mud like ﬂies in thick jam. How many times I broke my chaise (it’s my own property!) how many versts I walked! how be spattered my countenance and my clothes were! It was not driving but wading through mud. How I swore at it all! My brain would not work, I could do nothing but swear. I was utterly ex hausted, and was very glad to reach the post ing station at Krasnoyarsk. (3) From Krasno yarsk to Irkutsk, ﬁfteen hundred and sixty-six versts, heat, smoke from the burning woods, and dust–dust in one’s mouth, in one’s nose, in one’s pockets; when you look at yourself in the glass, you think your face has been painted. When, on reaching Irkutsk, I washed at the baths, the soapsuds off my head were not white but of an ashen brown colour, as though I were washing a horse. When I get home I will tell you about the Yenissey and the Taiga–very interesting and cu rious, for it is something quite new to a Euro pean; everything else is ordinary and monotonous. Roughly speaking, the scenery of Siberia is not very different from that of European Russia; there are differences, but they are not very no ticeable. Travelling is perfectly safe. Robbers and highwaymen are all nonsense and fairy tales. A revolver is utterly unneces sary, and you are as safe at night in the forest as you are by day on the Nevsky Prospect. It’s different for anyone travelling on foot.... TO N. A. LEIKIN. IRKUTSK, June 5, 1890. Greetings, dear Nikolay Alexandrovitch! I send you heartfelt good wishes from Irkutsk, from the depths of Siberia. I reached Irkutsk last night and was very glad to have arrived, as I was exhausted by the journey and missed friends and relations, to whom I had not writ ten for ages. Well, what is there of interest to write to you? I will begin by telling you that the 403 journey is extraordinarily long. From Tyumen to Irkutsk I have driven more than three thou sand versts. From Tyumen to Tomsk I had cold and ﬂooded rivers to contend with. The cold was awful; on Ascension Day there was frost and snow, so that I could not take off my sheep skin and felt boots until I reached the hotel at Tomsk. As for the ﬂoods, they were a verita ble plague of Egypt. The rivers rose above their banks and overﬂowed the meadows, and with them the roads, for dozens of versts around. I was continually having to exchange my chaise for a boat, and one could not get a boat for nothing–for a good boat one had to pay with one’s heart’s blood, for one had to sit waiting on the bank for twenty-four hours at a stretch in the cold wind and the rain.... From Tomsk to Krasnoyarsk was a desperate struggle through impassable mud. My goodness, it frightens me to think of it! How often I had to mend my chaise, to walk, to swear, to get out of my chaise and get into it again, and so on! It sometimes happened that I was from six to ten hours get ting from one station to another, and every time the chaise had to be mended it took from ten to ﬁfteen hours. From Krasnoyarsk to Irkutsk was fearfully hot and dusty. Add to all that hunger, dust in one’s nose, one’s eyes glued together with sleep, the continual dread that something would get broken in the chaise (it is my own), and boredom.... Nevertheless I am well con tent, and I thank God that He has given me the strength and opportunity to make this journey. I have seen and experienced a great deal, and it has all been very new and interesting to me not as a literary man, but as a human being. The Yenissey, the Taiga, the stations, the drivers, the wild scenery, the wild life, the physical ag onies caused by the discomforts of the journey, the enjoyment I got from rest–all taken together is so delightful that I can’t describe it. The mere fact that I have been for more than a month in the open air is interesting and healthy; every day for a month I have seen the sunrise.... TO HIS SISTER. IRKUTSK, June 6, 1890. Greetings to you, dear mother, Ivan, Masha and Misha, and all of you! In my last long letter I wrote to you that the mountains near Krasnoyarsk are like the Donets Ridge, but that’s not true; when I looked at them from the street I saw they were like high walls surrounding the city, and I was vividly re minded of the Caucasus. And when towards 407 evening I left the town and was crossing the Yenissey, I saw on the other bank mountains that were exactly like the Caucasus, as misty and dreamy. The Yenissey is a broad, swift, winding river, beautiful, ﬁner than the Volga. And the ferry across it is wonderful, ingeniously constructed, moving against the current; I will tell you when I am home about the construction of it. And so the mountains and the Yenissey are the ﬁrst things original and new that I have met in Siberia. The mountains and the Yenis sey have given me sensations which have made up to me a hundredfold for all the trials and troubles of the journey, and which have made me call Levitan a fool for being so stupid as not to come with me. The Taiga stretches unbroken from Krasno yarsk to Irkutsk. The trees are not bigger than in Sokolniki, but not one driver knows how far it goes. There is no end to be seen to it. It stretches for hundreds of versts. No one knows who or what is in the Taiga, and it only happens in winter that people come through the Taiga from the far north with reindeer for bread. When you get to the top of a mountain and look down, you see a mountain before you, then another, mountains at the sides too–and all thickly cov ered with forest. It makes one feel almost fright ened. That’s the second thing original and new. From Krasnoyarsk it began to be hot and dusty. The heat was terrible. My sheepskin and cap lie buried away. The dust is in my mouth, in my nose, down my neck–tfoo! We were approaching Irkutsk–we had to cross the Angara by ferry. As though to mock us a high wind sprang up. My military companions and I, after dreaming for ten days of a bath, dinner, and sleep, stood on the bank and turned pale at the thought that we should have to spend the night not at Irkutsk, but in the village. The ferry could not succeed in reaching the bank. We stood an hour, a second, and–oh Heavens!– the ferry made an effort and reached the bank. Bravo, we shall have a bath, we shall have sup per and sleep! Oh, how sweet to steam oneself, to eat, to sleep! Irkutsk is a ﬁne town. Quite a cultured town. There is a theatre, a museum, a town garden with a band, a good hotel.... No hideous fences, no absurd shop-signs, and no waste places with warming placards. There is a tavern called ”Tagan rog”; sugar costs twenty-four kopecks a pound, pine kernels six kopecks a pound. * * * * * I am quite well. My money is safe. I am sav ing up my coffee for Sahalin. I have splendid tea here, after which I am aware of an agree able excitement. I see Chinamen. They are a good-natured and intelligent people. At the Siberian bank they gave me money at once, re ceived me cordially, regaled me with cigarettes, and invited me to their summer villa. There is a magniﬁcent confectioner’s but everything is ﬁendishly dear. The pavements are of wood. Last night I drove with the ofﬁcers about the town. We heard someone cry ”help” six times. It must have been someone being murdered. We went to look, but could not ﬁnd anyone. The cabs in Irkutsk have springs. It is a bet ter town than Ekaterinburg or Tomsk. Quite European. Have a Mass celebrated on June 17th, [Foot note: The anniversary of the death of his brother Nikolay.] and keep the 29th [Footnote: His fa ther’s name-day.] as festively as you can; I shall be with you in thought and you must drink my health. * * * * * Everything I have is crumpled, dirty, torn! I look like a pickpocket. I shall not bring you any furs most likely. I do not know where they are sold, and I am too lazy to ask. One must take at least two big pillows for a journey and dark pillow cases are essential. What is Ivan doing? Where has he been? Has he been to the south? I am going from Irkutsk to Baikal. My companions are prepar ing for sea-sickness. My big boots have grown looser with wear ing, and don’t hurt my heels now. I have ordered buckwheat porridge for to morrow. On the journey here I thought of curds and began having them with milk at the sta tions. Did you get my postcards from the little towns? Keep them: I shall be able to judge from them how long the post takes. The post here is in no hurry. IRKUTSK, June 7, 1890. ... The steamer from Sryetensk leaves on June 20th. Good Christians, what am I to do till the 20th? How am I to dispose of myself? The jour ney to Sryetensk will only take ﬁve or six days. I have greatly altered the route of my journey. From Habarovsk (look at the map [Footnote: Chekhov’s family had, during his absence, a map of Siberia on the wall by means of which they followed his progress.]) I am going not to Nikolaevsk, but by the Ussuri to Vladivostok, 415 and from there to Sahalin. I must have a look at the Ussuri region. At Vladivostok I shall bathe in the sea and eat oysters. It was cold till I reached Kansk; from Kansk (see map) I began to go down to the south. Ev erything is as green as with you, even the oaks are out. The birches here are darker than in Russia, the green is not so sentimental. There are masses of the Russian white service-tree, which here takes the place of both the lilac and the cherry. They say they make an excellent jam from the service-tree. I tasted some of the fruit pickled; it was not bad. Two lieutenants and an army doctor are trav elling with me. They have received their travel ling expenses three times over, but have spent all the money, though they are travelling in one carriage. They are sitting without a farthing, waiting for the pay department to send them some money. They are nice fellows. They have had from ﬁfteen hundred to two thousand rou bles each for travelling expenses, and the jour ney will cost them next to nothing (excluding, of course, the cost of the stopping places). They do nothing but pitch into everybody at hotels and stations so that people are positively afraid to present their bills. In their company I pay less than usual.... To-day for the ﬁrst time in my life I saw a Siberian cat. It has long soft fur, and a gentle disposition. ... I felt homesick and sent you a telegram today asking you to subscribe together and send me a long telegram. It would be nothing to all of you, inhabitants of Luka, to ﬂing away ﬁve roubles. ... With whom is Mishka in love? To what happy woman is Ivanenko telling stories of his uncle? ... I must be in love with -Jamais- as I dreamed of her yesterday. In comparison with all the ”jeunes Siberiennes” with their Yakut Buriat physiognomies, who do not know how to dress, to sing, and to laugh, our -Jamais-, Drishka, and Gundassiha are simply queens. The Siberian girls and women are like frozen ﬁsh; one would have to be a walrus or a seal to get up a ﬂirtation with them. I am tired of my companions. It is much nicer travelling alone. I like silence better than anything on the journey and my companions talk and sing without stopping, and they talk of nothing but women. They borrowed a hundred and thirty-six roubles from me till to-morrow and have already spent it. They are regular sieves. ... The stations are sometimes thirty to thirty ﬁve versts apart. You drive by night, you drive and drive, till you feel silly and light-headed, and if you venture to ask the driver how far it is to the next station, he will never say less than seventeen versts. That’s particularly ago nizing when you have to go at a walking pace along a muddy road full of holes, and when you are thirsty. I have learned to do without sleep; I don’t mind a bit when they wake me. As a rule one does not sleep for one day and night, and then the next day at dinner-time there is a strained feeling in one’s eyelids; in the evening and in the night towards daybreak of the third day, one dozes in the chaise and sometimes falls asleep for a minute as one sits; at dinner and after dinner at the stations, while the horses are being harnessed, one lolls on the sofa, and the real torture only begins at night. In the evening, after drinking ﬁve glasses of tea, one’s face begins to burn, one’s body feels limp all over and longs to bend backwards; one’s eyes close, one’s feet ache in one’s big boots, one’s brain is in a tangle. If I allow myself to put up for the night I fall into a dead sleep at once; if I have strength of will to go on, I drop asleep in the chaise, however violent the jolting may be; at the stations the drivers wake one up, as one has to get out of the chaise and pay for the journey. They wake one not so much by shouting and tugging at one’s sleeve, as by the stink of garlic that issues from their lips; they smell of garlic and onion till they make me sick. I only learned to sleep in the chaise after Krasnoyarsk. On the way to Irkutsk I slept for ﬁfty-eight versts, and was only once woken up. But the sleep one gets as one drives makes one feel no better. It’s not real sleep, but a sort of unconscious condition, after which one’s head is muddled and there’s a bad taste in one’s mouth. Chinamen are like those decrepit old gentle men dear Nikolay [Footnote: Chekhov’s brother.] used to like drawing. Some of them have splen did pigtails. The police came to see me at Tomsk. To wards eleven o’clock the waiter suddenly an nounced to me that the assistant police-master wanted to see me. What was this for? Could it be politics? Could they suspect me of be ing a Voltairian? I said to the waiter, ”Ask him in.” A gentleman with long moustaches walks in and introduces himself. It appears he is devoted to literature, writes himself, and has come to me in my hotel room as though to Ma homed at Mecca to worship. I’ll tell you why I thought of him. Late in the autumn he is go ing to Petersburg, and I have foisted my trunk upon him and asked him to leave it at the  Novoye Vremya- ofﬁce. You might keep that in mind in case any one of us or our friends goes to Petersburg. You might, by the way, look out for a place in the country. When I get back to Russia I shall take ﬁve years’ rest–that is, stay in one place and twiddle my thumbs. A place in the country will come in very handy. I think the money will be found, for things don’t look bad. If I work off the money I have had in advance (half of it is worked off already) I shall certainly borrow two or three thousand in the spring, to be paid off over a period of ﬁve years. That will not be against my conscience, as I have already let the publishing department of the -Novoye Vremya make two or three thousand out of my books, and I shall let them make more. I think I shall not begin on any serious work till I am ﬁve and thirty.... I want to try personal life, of which I have had some before, but have not noticed it owing to various circumstances. To-day I rubbed my leather coat with grease. It’s a splendid coat. It has saved me from catch ing cold. My sheepskin is a capital thing, too: it serves me as a coat and a mattress, both. One is as warm in it as on a stove. It’s wretched without pillows. Hay does not take the place of them, and with the continual friction there’s a lot of dust from it which tickles one’s face and prevents one from dozing. I haven’t a single sheet. That’s horrid too. And I ought to have taken some more trousers. The more luggage one has the better–there’s less jolting and more comfort. Good-bye, though. I have got nothing more to write about. My greetings to all. STATION LISTVENITCHNAYA, ON LAKE BAIKAL, June 13. I am having an idiotic time. On the evening of the 11th of June, the day before yesterday, we set off from Irkutsk, in the fond hope of catch ing the Baikal steamer, which leaves at four o’clock in the morning. From Irkutsk to Baikal there are only three stations. At the ﬁrst sta 425 tion they informed us that all the horses were exhausted and that it was therefore impossible to go. We had to put up for the night. Yes terday morning we set off from that station, and by midday we reached Baikal. We went to the harbour, and in answer to our inquiries were told that the steamer did not go till Fri day the ﬁfteenth. This meant that we should have to sit on the bank and look at the wa ter and wait. As there is nothing that does not end in time, I have no objection to waiting, and always wait patiently; but the point is the steamer leaves Sryetensk on the 20th and sails down the Amur: if we don’t catch it we must wait for the next steamer, which does not go till the 30th. Merciful Heavens, when shall I get to Sahalin! We drove to Baikal along the bank of the An gara, which rises out of Lake Baikal and ﬂows into the Yenissey. Look at the map. The banks are picturesque. Mountains and mountains, and dense forests on the mountains. The weather was exquisite still, sunny and warm; as I drove I felt I was exceptionally well; I felt so happy that I cannot describe it. It was perhaps the contrast after the stay at Irkutsk, and because the scenery on the Angara is like Switzerland. It is something new and original. We drove along the river bank, came to the mouth of the river, and turned to the left; then we came upon the bank of Lake Baikal, which in Siberia is called the sea. It is like a mirror. The other side, of course, is out of sight; it is ninety versts away. The banks are high, steep, stony, and covered with forest, to right and to left there are promontories which jut into the sea like Au dag or the Tohtebel at Feodosia. It’s like the Crimea. The station of Listvenitchnaya lies at the water’s edge, and is strikingly like Yalta: if the houses were white it would be exactly like Yalta. Only there are no buildings on the moun tains, as they are too overhanging and it is im possible to build on them. We have taken a little barn of a lodging that reminds one of any of the Kraskovsky summer villas. Just outside the window, two or three yards from the wall, is Lake Baikal. We pay a rouble a day. The mountains, the forests, the mirror-like Baikal are all poisoned for me by the thought that we shall have to stay here till the ﬁfteenth. What are we to do here? What is more, we don’t know what there is for us to eat. The inhabitants feed upon nothing but garlic. There is neither meat nor ﬁsh. They have given us no milk, but have promised it. For a little white loaf they demanded sixteen kopecks. I bought some buckwheat and a piece of smoked pork, and asked them to make a thin porridge of it: it was not nice, but there was nothing to be done, I had to eat it. All the evening we hunted about the village to ﬁnd someone who would sell us a hen, and found no one.... But there is vodka. The Russian is a great pig. If you ask him why he doesn’t eat meat and ﬁsh he justiﬁes himself by the absence of trans port, ways and communications, and so on, and yet vodka is to be found in the remotest villages and as much of it as you please. And yet one would have supposed that it would have been much easier to obtain meat and ﬁsh than vodka, which is more expensive and more dif ﬁcult to transport.... Yes, drinking vodka must be much more interesting than ﬁshing in Lake Baikal or rearing cattle. At midnight a little steamer arrived; we went to look at it, and seized the opportunity to ask if there was anything to eat. We were told that to-morrow we should be able to get dinner, but that now it was late, the kitchen ﬁre was out, and so on. We thanked them for ”to-morrow”–it was something to look forward to anyway! But alas! the captain came in and told us that at four o’clock in the morning the steamer was setting off for Kultuk. We thanked him. In the refreshment bar, where there was not room to turn round, we drank a bottle of sour beer (thirty-ﬁve kopecks), and saw on a plate some amber beads–it was salmon caviare. We re turned home, and to sleep. I am sick of sleep ing. Every day one has to put down one’s sheep skin with the wool upwards, under one’s head one puts a folded greatcoat and a pillow, and one sleeps on this heap in one’s waistcoat and trousers.... Civilization, where art thou? To-day there is rain and Lake Baikal is plunged in mist. ”Interesting,” Semaskho would say. It’s dull. One ought to sit down and write, but one can never work in bad weather. One has a foreboding of merciless boredom; if I were alone I should not mind but there are two lieu tenants and an army doctor with me, who are fond of talking and arguing. They don’t un derstand much but they talk about everything. One of the lieutenants, moreover, is a bit of a Hlestakov and a braggart. When one is travel ling one absolutely must be alone. To sit in a chaise or in a room alone with one’s thoughts is much more interesting than being with people. * * * * * Congratulate me: I sold my own carriage at Irkutsk. How much I gained on it I won’t say, or mother would fall into a faint and not sleep for ﬁve nights. Your Homo Sachaliensis, A. CHEKHOV. TO HIS MOTHER. STEAMER ”YERMAK,” June 20, 1890. Greeting, dear ones at home! At last I can take off my heavy muddy boots, my shabby breeches, and my blue shirt which is shiny with dust and sweat; I can wash and dress like a human being. I am not sitting in a chaise but in a ﬁrst-class cabin of the steamer 433 Yermak-. This change took place ten days ago, and this is how it happened. I wrote to you from Listvenitchnaya that I was late for the Baikal steamer, that I had to cross Lake Baikal on Fri day instead of Tuesday, and that owing to this I should only be able to catch the Amur steamer on the 30th. But fate is capricious, and often plays us tricks we do not expect. On Thursday morning I went out for a walk on the shores of Lake Baikal; behold–the funnel of one of the lit tle steamers is smoking. I inquire where the steamer is going. They tell me, ”Across the sea” to Klyuevo; some merchant had hired it to take his waggons of goods across the Lake. We, too, wanted to cross ”the sea” and to go to Boyarskaya station. I inquire how many ver sts from Klyuevo to Boyarskaya. They tell me twenty-seven. I run back to my companions and beg them to take the risk of going to Klyuevo. I say the ”risk” because, going to Klyuevo where there is nothing but a harbour and a watch man’s hut, we ran the risk of not ﬁnding horses, having to stay on at Klyuevo, and being late for Friday’s steamer, which for us would be worse than Igor’s death, as we should have to wait till Tuesday. My companions consented. We gathered together our belongings, with cheer ful legs stepped on to the steamer and straight to the refreshment bar: soup, for the love of God! Half my kingdom for a plate of soup! The refreshment bar was very nasty and cramped; but the cook, Grigory Ivanitch, who had been a house-serf at Voronezh, turned out to be at the tip-top of his profession. He fed us magnif icently. The weather was still and sunny. The water of Lake Baikal is the colour of turquoise, more transparent than the Black Sea. They say that in deep places you can see the bottom over a verst below; and I myself have seen to such a depth, with rocks and mountains plunged in the turquoise-blue, that it sent a shiver all over me. Our journey over Lake Baikal was wonder ful. I shall never forget it as long as I live. But I will tell you what was not nice. We travelled third class, and the whole deck was occupied by the waggon-horses, which were wild as mad things. These horses gave a special character to our crossing: it seemed as though we were in a brigand’s steamer. At Klyuevo the watchman undertook to convey our luggage to the station; he drove the cart while we walked along the very picturesque shore. Levitan was an ass not to come with me. The way was through woods: on the right, woods running uphill; on the left, woods running down to the Lake. Such ravines, such crags! The colouring of Lake Baikal is soft and warm. It was, by the way, very warm. After walking eight versts we reached the station of Myskan, where a Kyahtan ofﬁcial, who was also on his travels, regaled us with excellent tea, and where we got the horses for Boyarskaya; and so we set off on Thursday instead of Fri day; what is more, we got twenty-four hours in advance of the post, which usually takes all the horses at the station. We began driving as fast as we could, cherishing a faint hope of reaching Sryetensk by the 20th. I will tell you when we meet about my journey along the bank of the Selenga and across Transbaikalia. Now I will only say that Selenga is one continuous lone liness, and in Transbaikalia I found everything I wanted: the Caucasus, and the valley of the Psyol, and the Zvenigorod district, and the Don. By day you gallop through the Caucasus, at night along the steppe of the Don; in the morn ing, rousing yourself from slumber, behold the province of Poltava–and so for the whole thou sand versts. Verhneudinsk is a nice little town. Tchita is a wretched place, in the style of Sumy. I need hardly say that we had no time to think of sleep or dinner. One gallops on thinking of nothing but the chance that at the next sta tion we might not get horses, and might be kept ﬁve or six hours. We did two hundred versts in twenty-four hours–one can’t do more than that in the summer. We were stupeﬁed. The heat was fearful by day, while at night it was so cold that I had to put on my leather coat over my cloth one. One night I even wore my sheep skin. Well, we drove on and on, and reached Sryetensk this morning just an hour before the steamer left, giving the drivers from the last two stations a rouble each for themselves. And so my horse-journey is over. It has lasted two months (I set out on the 21st of April). If we exclude the time spent on the railway and the steamer, the three days spent in Ekaterinburg, the week in Tomsk, the day in Krasnoyarsk, the week in Irkutsk, the two days on the shores of Lake Baikal, and the days wasted in waiting for boats to cross the ﬂoods, you can judge of the rate at which I have driven. My journey has been most successful, I wish nothing better for anyone. I have not once been ill, and of the mass of things I had with me I have lost noth ing but a penknife, the strap off my trunk, and a little jar of carbolic ointment. My money is safe. It is not often that anyone succeeds in travelling a thousand versts so well. I have grown so used to driving that now I don’t feel like myself, and cannot believe that I am not in a chaise and that I don’t hear the rattling and the jingling of the bells. It seems strange that when I go to bed I can stretch out my legs full length, and that my face is not cov ered with dust. But what is stranger still is that the bottle of brandy Kuvshinnikov gave me has not been broken, and that the brandy is still in it, every drop of it. I have vowed not to uncork it except on the shore of the Paciﬁc. I am sailing down the Shilka, which runs into the Amur at the Pokrovskaya Stanitsa. The river is not broader than the Psyol, it is even narrower. The shores are stony: there are crags and forests. It is absolutely wild.... We tack about to avoid foundering on a sandbank, or running our helm into the banks: steamers and barges often do so in the rapids. It’s stiﬂing. We have just stopped at Ust-Kara, where we have landed ﬁve or six convicts. There are mines here and a convict prison. Yesterday we were at Nertchinsk. The little town is nothing to boast of, but one could live there. And how are you, messieurs and mesdames? I know positively nothing about you. You might subscribe twopence each and send me a full telegram. The steamer will stay the night at Gorbitsa. The nights here are foggy, sailing is dangerous, I shall send off this letter at Gorbitsa. ... I am going ﬁrst class because my com panions are in the second. I have got away from them. We have driven together (three in one chaise), we have slept together and are sick of each other, especially I of them. * * * * * My handwriting is very bad, shaky. That is because the steamer rocks. It’s difﬁcult to write. I broke off here. I went to my lieutenants and had tea. They have both had a long sleep and were in a very cordial mood. One of them, Lieutenant N. (the surname jars upon my ear), is in the infantry; he is a tall, well-fed, loud voiced Courlander, a great braggart and Hlestakov, who sings songs from every opera, but has no more ear than a smoked herring, an unlucky fellow who has squandered all the money for his travelling expenses, knows all Mickiewicz by heart, is ill-bred, far too unreserved, and bab bles till it makes you sick. Like me, he is fond of talking about his uncles and aunts. The other lieutenant, M., a geographer, is a quiet, mod est, thoroughly well-educated fellow. If it were not for N., I could travel with the other for a million versts without being bored. But with N., who intrudes into every conversation, the other bores me too.... I believe we are reaching Gorbitsa. To-morrow I will make up the form of a tele gram which you must send me to Sahalin. I will try to put all I want to know in thirty words, and you must try and keep strictly to the pattern. The gad-ﬂies bite. TO N. A. LEIKIN. GORBITSA, June 20, 1890. Greetings, dear Nikolay Alexandrovitch! I wrote you this as I approached Gorbitsa, one of the Cossack settlements on the banks of the Shilka, a tributary of the Amur. This is where I have got to. I am sailing down the Amur. I sent you a letter from Irkutsk. Did you get it? Since then more than a week has passed, in 445 the course of which I have crossed Lake Baikal and driven through Transbaikalia. Lake Baikal is wonderful, and the Siberians may well call it a sea instead of a lake. The water is extraordi narily transparent, so that one can see through it as through air; the colour is a soft turquoise very agreeable to the eye. The banks are moun tainous, and covered with forests; it is all im penetrable wildness without a break anywhere. There are great numbers of bears, wild goats, and wild creatures of all sorts, who spend their time living in the Taiga and eating one another. I spent two days and nights on the shore of Lake Baikal. It was still and hot when I was sailing. Transbaikalia is splendid. It is a mixture of Switzerland, the Don, and Finland. I have driven with horses more than four thousand versts. My journey was entirely suc cessful. I was in good health all the time, and lost nothing of my luggage but a penknife. I can wish no one a better journey. The jour ney is absolutely free from danger, and all the tales of escaped convicts, of night attacks, and so on are nothing but legends, traditions of the remote past. A revolver is an entirely super ﬂuous article. Now I am sitting in a ﬁrst-class cabin, and feel as though I were in Europe. I feel in the mood one is in after passing an ex amination. A whistle!–that’s Gorbitsa. * * * * * The banks of the Shilka are picturesque like stage scenes but, alas! there is something op pressive in this complete absence of human be ings. It is like a cage without a bird. TO HIS SISTER. June 21, 1890. 6 o’clock in the evening, not far from the Stanitsa Pokrovskaya. We ran upon a rock, stove a hole in the steamer, and are now undergoing repairs. We are aground on a sandbank and pumping out water. On the left is the Russian bank, on the right the Chi nese. If I were back at home now I should have the right to boast: ”Though I have not been in China I have seen China only twenty feet off.” We are to stay the night in Pokrovskaya. We shall make up a party to see the place. 449 If I were a millionaire I should certainly have a steamer of my own on the Amur. It is a ﬁne, interesting country. I advise Yegor Mihailovitch not to go to Tuapse but here; there are here by the way neither tarantulas nor phalangas. On the Chinese side there is a sentry post–a small hut; sacks of ﬂour are piled up on the bank, ragged Chinamen are dragging the sacks on barrows to the hut. And beyond is the dense, endless forest. Some schoolgirls are travelling with us from Irkutsk–Russian faces, but not good-looking. POKROVSKAYA STANITSA, June 23, 1890. I have told you already we are aground on a sandbank. At Ust-Stryelka, where the Shilka joins the Argun (see map), the steamer went aground in two and a half feet of water, struck a rock, and stove in several holes in its side and, the hold ﬁlling with water, the steamer sank to the bottom. They began pumping out water and putting on patches; a naked sailor crawled into 451 the hold, stood up to his neck in water, and tried the holes with his heels. Each hole was covered on the inside with cloth smeared with grease: they lay a board on the top, and stuck a support upon the latter which pressed against the ceiling like a column. Such is the repair ing. They were pumping from ﬁve o’clock in the evening till night, but still the water did not abate: they had to put off the work till morn ing. In the morning they discovered some more holes, and began patching and pumping again. The sailors pump while we, the general pub lic, pace up and down the decks, criticize, eat, drink, and sleep; the captain and his mate do the same as the general public, and seem in no hurry. On the right is the Chinese bank, on the left is the stanitsa, Pokrovskaya, with the Cossacks of the Amur; if one likes one can stay in Russia, if one likes one can go into China, there is nothing to hinder one. It is insuffer ably hot in the daytime, so that one has to put on a silk shirt. They give us dinner at twelve o’clock, supper at seven. Unluckily the steamer -Vyestnik- coming the other way with a crowd of passengers is ap proaching the stanitsa. The -Vyestnik- can not go on either, and both steamers stay stock still. There is a military band on the -Vyestnik-, consequently there has been a regular festival. All yesterday the band was playing on deck to the entertainment of the captain and sailors, and consequently to the delay of the repairing. The feminine half of the public were highly de lighted; a band, ofﬁcers, naval men ... oh! The schoolgirls were particularly pleased. Yesterday evening we walked about the Cossack settle ment, where the same band, hired by the Cos sacks, was playing. Today we are continuing the repairs. The captain promises that we shall start af ter dinner, but he promises it listlessly, gazing away into space–obviously he does not mean it. We are in no haste. When I asked a passenger, ”Whenever are we going on?” he asked, ”Why, aren’t you all right here!” And that’s true. Why not stay, as long as we are not bored? The captain, his mate, and his agent are the acme of politeness. The Chinese in the third class are good-natured and funny. Yesterday a Chinaman sat on the deck and sang some thing very mournful in a falsetto voice; as he did so his proﬁle was funnier than any carica ture. Everybody looked at him and laughed, while he took not the slightest notice. He sang falsetto and then began singing tenor. My God, what a voice! It was like the bleat of a sheep or a calf. The Chinese remind me of good-natured tame animals, their pigtails are long and black like Natalya Mihailovna’s. Apropos of tame ani mals, there’s a tame fox cub living in the toilet room. It sits and looks on as one washes. If it sees no one for a long time it begins to whine. What strange conversations one hears! They talk of nothing but gold, the mines, the Volun teer Fleet and Japan. In Pokrovskaya all the peasants and even the priests mine for gold. The exiles follow the same occupation and grow rich as quickly as they grow poor. There are people who look like artizans and who never drink anything but champagne, and walk to the tavern on red baize which is laid down from their hut to the tavern. * * * * * The Amur country is exceedingly interesting. Highly original. The life here is such as people have no conception of in Europe. It reminds me of American stories. The shores of the Amur are so wild, original, and luxuriant that one longs to live there all one’s life. I am writing these last few lines on the 25th of June. The steamer rocks and prevents my writing properly. We are moving again. I have come a thousand versts down the Amur already, and have seen a mil lion gorgeous landscapes; I feel giddy with ec stasy.... It’s marvellous scenery, and how hot! What warm nights! There is a mist in the morn ings but it is warm. I look through an opera-glass at the shore and see a prodigious number of ducks, geese, grebes, herons and all sorts of creatures with long beaks. This would be the place to take a summer villa in! At a little place called Reinov a goldminer asked me to see his sick wife. As I was leaving him he thrust into my hands a roll of notes. I felt ashamed. I was beginning to refuse and thrust it back, saying that I was very rich myself; we talked together for a long time trying to persuade each other, and yet in the end ﬁfteen roubles remained in my hands. Yes terday a goldminer with the face of Petya Pol evaev dined in my cabin; at dinner he drank champagne instead of water, and treated us to it. The villages here are like those on the Don. There is a difference in the buildings but noth ing to speak of. The inhabitants don’t keep the fasts, and eat meat even in Holy Week; the girls smoke cigarettes, and old women smoke pipes– it is the correct thing. It’s strange to see peas ants with cigarettes! And what liberalism! Oh, what liberalism! The air on the steamer is positively red-hot with the talk that goes on. People are not afraid to talk aloud here. There’s no one to arrest them and nowhere to exile them to, so you can be as liberal as you like. The people for the most part are independent, self-reliant, and log ical. If there is any misunderstanding at Ust Kara, where the convicts work (among them many politicals who don’t work), all the Amur region is in revolt. It is not the thing to tell tales. An escaped convict can travel freely on the steamer to the ocean, without any fear of the captain’s giving him up. This is partly due to the absolute indifference to everything that is done in Russia. Everybody says: ”What is it to do with me?” I forgot to tell you that in Transbaikalia the drivers are not Russians but Buriats. A funny people! Their horses are regular vipers; they could never be harnessed without trouble–more furious than ﬁre-brigade horses. While the trace horse is being harnessed, its legs are hobbled; as soon as they are set free the chaise goes ﬂy ing to the devil, so that one holds one’s breath. If one does not hobble a horse while it is being harnessed, it kicks, knocks bits out of the shaft with its hoofs, tears the harness, and behaves like a young devil that has been caught by the horns. June 26. We are getting near Blagoveshtchensk. Be well and merry, and don’t get used to being without me. No doubt you have already? Re spectful greetings to all, and a friendly kiss. I am perfectly well. TO A. S. SUVORIN. BLAGOVESHTCHENSK, June 27, 1890. The Amur is a very ﬁne river; I have gained more from it than I could have expected, and I have been wishing for a long time to share my transports with you, but the rascally steamer has been rocking all the seven days I have been on it, and prevents me writing properly. More over, I am quite incapable of describing any thing so beautiful as the shores of the Amur; I 461 am at a complete loss before them, and recog nise my bankruptcy. How is one to describe them? ... Rocks, crags, forests, thousands of ducks, herons and all sorts of beaked gentry, and absolute wilderness. On the left the Rus sian shore, on the right the Chinese. I can look at Russia or China as I please. China is as deserted and wild as Russia: villages and sen tinels’ huts are rare. Everything in my head is muddled; and no wonder, your Excellency! I have come more than a thousand versts down the Amur and seen a million landscapes, and you know before the Amur there was Lake Baikal, Transbaikalia.... Truly I have seen such riches and had so much enjoyment that death would have no terrors now. The people on the Amur are original, their life is interesting, unlike ours. They talk of gold, gold, gold, and nothing else. I am in a stupid state, I feel no inclination to write, and I write shortly, piggishly; to-day I sent you four papers about Yenissey and the Taiga, later on I will send you something about Lake Baikal, Transbaikalia, and the Amur. Don’t throw away these sheets; I will collect them, and they will serve as notes from which I can tell you what I don’t know how to put on paper. To-day I changed into the steamer -Muravyov , which they say does not rock; maybe I shall write. I am in love with the Amur; I should be glad to spend a couple of years on it. There is beauty, space, freedom and warmth. Switzerland and France have never known such freedom. The lowest convict breathes more freely on the Amur than the highest general in Russia. If you lived here, you would write a great deal of good stuff and delight the public, but I am not equal to it. One begins to meet Chinamen at Irkutsk, and here they are common as ﬂies. They are the most good-natured people. If Nastya and Borya made the acquaintance of the Chinese, they would leave donkeys alone, and transfer their affection to the Chinese. They are charm ing tame animals. ... When I invited a Chinaman to the refresh ment bar to treat him to vodka, before drinking it he held out the glass to me, the bar-keeper, the waiters, and said: ”Taste.” That’s the Chi nese ceremonial. He did not drink it off as we do, but drank it in sips, eating something be tween each sip, and then, to express his grat itude, gave me several Chinese coins. An aw fully polite people. They are dressed poorly, but beautifully; they eat daintily, with ceremony.... TO HIS SISTER. THE STEAMER ”MURAVYOV,” June 29, 1890. Meteors are ﬂying in my cabin–these are lumi nous beetles that look like electric sparks. Wild goats swim across the Amur in the day-time. The ﬂies here are huge. I am sharing my cabin with a Chinaman–Son-Luli–who is constantly telling me how in China for the merest triﬂe it is 465 ”off with his head.” Last night he got drunk with opium, and was talking in his sleep all night and preventing me from sleeping. On the 27th I walked about the Chinese town Aigun. Little by little I seem gradually to be stepping into a fantastic world. The steamer rocks, it is hard to write. To-morrow I shall reach Habarovsk. The Chi naman began to sing from music written on his fan. TELEGRAM TO HIS MOTHER. SAHALIN, July 11, 1890. Arrived well, telegraph Sahalin.–CHEKHOV. TELEGRAM TO HIS MOTHER. SAHALIN, September 27, 1890. Well. Shall arrive shortly.–CHEKHOV. TO A. S. SUVORIN. THE STEAMER ”BAIKAL,” September 11, 1890. Greetings! I am sailing on the Gulf of Tartary from the north of Sahalin to the south. I am writing; and don’t know when this letter will reach you. I am well, though I see on all sides glaring at me the green eyes of cholera which has laid a trap for me. In Vladivostok, in Japan, 467 in Shanghai, Tchifu, Suez, and even in the moon, I fancy–everywhere there is cholera, everywhere quarantine and terror.... They expect the cholera in Sahalin and keep all vessels in quarantine. In short, it is a bad lookout. Europeans are dy ing at Vladivostok, among others the wife of a general has died. I have spent just two months in the north of Sahalin. I was received by the local admin istration very amicably, though Galkin had not written a single word about me. Neither Galkin nor the Baroness V., nor any of the other genii I was so foolish as to appeal to for help, turned out of the slightest use to me; I had to act on my own initiative. The Sahalin general, Kononovitch, is a culti vated and gentlemanly man. We soon got on together, and everything went off well. I am bringing some papers with me from which you will see that I was put on the most agreeable footing from the ﬁrst. I have seen -everything-, so that the question is not now -what- I have seen, but how I have seen it. I don’t know what will come of it, but I have done a good deal. I have got enough material for three dissertations. I got up every morning at ﬁve o’clock and went to bed late; and all day long was on the strain from the thought that there was still so much I hadn’t done; and now that I have done with the convict system, I have the feeling that I have seen everything but have not noticed the elephants. By the way, I had the patience to make a census of the whole Sahalin population. I made the round of all the settlements, went into every hut and talked to everyone; I made use of the card system in making the census, and I have already registered about ten thousand convicts and settlers. In other words, there is not in Sa halin one convict or settler who has not talked with me. I was particularly successful with the census of the children, on which I am building great hopes. I dined at Landsberg’s; I sat in the kitchen of the former Baroness Gembruk.... I visited all the celebrities. I was present at a ﬂogging, af ter which I dreamed for three or four nights of the executioner and the revolting accessories. I have talked to men who were chained to trucks. Once when I was drinking tea in a mine, Boro davkin, once a Petersburg merchant who was convicted of arson, took a teaspoon out of his pocket and gave it to me, and the long and the short of it is that I have upset my nerves and have vowed not to come to Sahalin again. I should write more to you, but there is a lady in the cabin who giggles and chatters un ceasingly. I haven’t the strength to write. She has been laughing and cackling ever since yes terday evening. This letter will go across America, but I shall go probably not across America. Everyone says that the American way is duller and more ex pensive. To-morrow I shall see Japan, the Island of Matsmai. Now it is twelve o’clock at night. It is dark on the sea, the wind is blowing. I don’t understand how the steamer can go on and ﬁnd its direction when one can’t see a thing, and above all in such wild, little-known waters as those in the Gulf of Tartary. When I remember that I am ten thousand versts away from my world I am overcome with apathy. It seems I shall not be home for a hun dred years.... God give you health and all bless ings. I feel dreary. * * * * * TO HIS MOTHER. SAHALIN, October 6, 1890. My greetings, dear mother! I write you this letter almost on the eve of my departure for Russia. Every day we expect a steamer of the Volunteer Fleet, and cherish hopes that it will not come later than the 10th of October. I send this letter to Japan, whence it will go by Shanghai or America. I am living at the station of Korsakovo, where there is neither 473 telegraph nor post, and which is not visited by ships oftener than once a fortnight. Yesterday a steamer arrived and brought me from the north a pile of letters and telegrams. From the letters I learn that Masha likes the Crimea, I believe she will like the Caucasus better still.... * * * * * Strange, with you it has been cold and rainy, while in Sahalin from the day of my arrival till to-day it has been bright warm weather: there is slight cold with hoar-frost in the mornings, the snow is white on one of the mountains, but the earth is still green, the leaves have not fallen, and all the vegetation is still as ﬂourish ing as at a summer villa in May. There you have Sahalin! * * * * * At midnight yesterday I heard the roar of a steamer. Everybody jumped out of bed: hur rah! the steamer has arrived! We dressed and went out with lanterns to the harbour; we gazed into the distance; there really was a steamer.... The majority of voices decided that it was the -Petersburg-, on which I am to go to Russia. I was overjoyed. We got into a boat and rowed to the steamer. We went on and on, till at last we saw in the mist the dark hulk of a steamer. One of us shouted in a hoarse voice asking the name of the vessel. And we received the answer ”the -Baikal-.” Tfoo! anathema! what a disappoint ment! I am I homesick, and weary of Sahalin. Here for the last three months I have seen no one but convicts or people who can talk of noth ing but penal servitude, the lash, and the con victs. A depressing existence. One longs to get quickly to Japan and from there to India. I am quite well, except for ﬂashes in my eye from which I often suffer now, after which I al ways have a bad headache. I had the ﬂashes in my eye yesterday and to-day, and so I am writing this with a headache and heaviness all over. At the station the Japanese General Kuse San lives with his two secretaries, good friends of mine. They live like Europeans. To-day the local authorities visited them in state to present decorations that had been conferred on them; and I, too, went with my headache and had to drink champagne. Since I have been in the south I have three times driven to Nay Race where the real ocean waves break. Look at the map and you will see at once on the south coast that poor dis mal Nay Race. The waves cast up a boat with six American whaleﬁshers, who had been ship wrecked off the coast of Sahalin; they are living now at the station and solemnly walk about the streets. They are waiting for the -Petersburg and will sail with me. I am not bringing you furs, there are none in Sahalin. Keep well and Heaven guard you all. I am bringing you all presents. The cholera in Vladivostok and Japan is over. TO A. S. SUVORIN. MALAYA DMITROVKA, MOSCOW, December 9. ... Hurrah! Here at last I am sitting at my table at home! I pray to my faded penates and write to you. I have now a happy feeling as though I had not been away from home at all. I am 479 well and thriving to the marrow of my bones. Here’s a very brief report for you. I was in Sa halin not two months, as you have printed, but three months plus two days. I worked at high pressure. I made a full and minute census of the whole of Sahalin’s population, and saw  everything- except the death penalty. When we see each other I will show you a whole trunkful of stuff about the convicts which is very valu able as raw material. I know a very great deal now, but I have brought away a horrid feeling. While I was staying in Sahalin, I only had a bitter feeling in my inside as though from ran cid butter; and now, as I remember it, Sahalin seems to me a perfect hell. For two months I worked intensely, putting my back into it; in the third month I began to feel ill from the bit terness I have spoken of, from boredom, and the thought that the cholera would come from Vladivostok to Sahalin, and that so I was in danger of having to winter in the convict set tlement. But, thank God! the cholera ceased, and on the 13th of October the steamer bore me away from Sahalin. I have been in Vladi vostok. About the Primorsky Region and our Eastern sea-coast with its ﬂeets, its problems, and its Paciﬁc dreams altogether, I have only one thing to tell of: its crying poverty! Poverty, ignorance, and worthlessness, that might drive one to despair. One honest man for ninety-nine thieves, that are blackening the name of Rus sia.... We passed Japan because the cholera was there, and so I have not bought you any thing Japanese, and the ﬁve hundred you gave me for your purchases I have spent on my own needs, for which you have, by law, the right to send me to a settlement in Siberia. The ﬁrst foreign port we reached was Hong Kong. It is an exquisite bay. The trafﬁc on the sea was such as I had never seen before even in pictures; ex cellent roads, trams, a railway to the moun tains, a museum, botanical gardens; wherever you look you see the tenderest solicitude on the part of the English for the men in their ser vice; there is even a club for the sailors. I went about in a jinrickshaw–that is, carried by men– bought all sorts of rubbish of the Chinese, and was moved to indignation at hearing my Rus sian fellow-travellers abuse the English for ex ploiting the natives. I thought: Yes, the English exploit the Chinese, the Sepoys, the Hindoos, but they do give them roads, aqueducts, muse ums, Christianity, and what do you give them? When we left Hong Kong the boat began to rock. The steamer was empty and lurched through an angle of thirty-eight degrees, so that we were afraid it would upset. I am not subject to sea sickness: that discovery was very agreeable to me. On the way to Singapore we threw two corpses into the sea. When one sees a dead man, wrapped in sailcloth, ﬂy, turning som ersaults in the water, and remembers that it is several miles to the bottom, one feels fright ened, and for some reason begins to fancy that one will die oneself and will be thrown into the sea. Our horned cattle have fallen sick. Through the united verdict of Dr. Stcherbak and your humble servant, the cattle have been killed and thrown into the sea. I have no clear memory of Singapore as, for some reason, I felt very sad while I was driving about it, and was almost weeping. Next after it comes Ceylon–an earthly Paradise. There in that Paradise I went more than a hundred ver sts on the railway and gazed at palm forests and bronze women to my heart’s content.... Af ter Ceylon we sailed for thirteen days and nights without stopping and were all stupid from bore dom. I bear the heat well. The Red Sea is de pressing; I felt touched as I gazed at Sinai. God’s world is a good place. The one thing not good in it is we. How little justice and hu mility there is in us. How little we understand true patriotism! A drunken, broken-down de bauchee of a husband loves his wife and chil dren, but of what use is that love? We, so we are told in our own newspapers, love our great motherland, but how does that love express it self? Instead of knowledge–insolence and im measurable conceit; instead of work–sloth and swinishness; there is no justice, the concep tion of honour does not go beyond ”the honour of the uniform”–the uniform which is so com monly seen adorning the prisoner’s dock in our courts. Work is what is wanted, and the rest can go to the devil. First of all we must be just, and all the rest will be added unto us, I have a passionate desire to talk to you. My soul is in a ferment. I want no one else but you, for it is only with you I can talk. * * * * * How glad I am that everything was managed without Galkin-Vrasskoy’s help. He didn’t write one line about me, and I turned up in Sahalin utterly unknown. * * * * * MOSCOW, December 24, 1890. I believe in Koch and in spermine and praise God for it. All that–that is the kochines, sper mines, and so on–seem to the public a kind of miracle that leaped forth from some brain, af ter the fashion of Pallas Athene; but people who have a closer acquaintance with the facts know that they are only the natural sequel of what has been done during the last twenty years. A great deal has been done, my dear fellow! Surgery alone has done so much that one is 487 fairly dumbfoundered at it. To one who is study ing medicine now, the time before twenty years ago seems simply pitiable. My dear friend, if I were offered the choice between the ”ideals” of the renowned ”sixties,” or the very poorest Zemstvo hospital of to-day, I should, without a moment’s hesitation, choose the second. Will kochine cure syphilis? It’s possible. But as for cancer, you must allow me to have my doubts. Cancer is not a microbe; it’s a tis sue, growing in the wrong place, and like a noxious weed smothering all the neighbouring tissues. If N.’s uncle feels better, that is, be cause the microbes of erysipelas–that is, the el ements that produce the disease of erysipelas– form a component part of kochine. It was ob served long ago that with the development of erysipelas, the growth of malignant tumours is temporarily checked. * * * * * It’s a strange business–while I was travel ling to Sahalin and back I felt perfectly well, but now, at home, the devil knows what is hap pening to me. My head is continually aching, I have a feeling of languor all over, I am quickly exhausted, apathetic, and worst of all, my heart is not beating regularly. My heart is continually stopping for a few seconds.... MOSCOW, January, 1891. I shall probably come to Petersburg on the 8th of January.... Since by February I shall not have a farthing, I must make haste and ﬁn ish the novel [Footnote: ”The Duel.”] I’ve begun. There is something in the novel about which I must talk to you and ask your advice. I spent Christmas in a horrible way. To be gin with, I had palpitations of the heart; sec ondly, my brother Ivan came to stay and was ill with typhoid, poor fellow; thirdly, after my Sa 491 halin labours and the tropics, my Moscow life seems to me now so petty, so bourgeois, and so dull, that I feel ready to bite; fourthly, work ing for my daily bread prevents my giving up my time to Sahalin; ﬁfthly, my acquaintances bother me, and so on. The poet Merezhkovsky has been to see me twice; he is a very intelligent man. How sorry I am you did not see my mon goose. It is a wonderful creature.
